<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The American Nations, Vol. I.</title>
      <author><name reg="Rafinesque, C. S.">C. S. Rafinesque</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>October 14, 2010</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">34070</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="he"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2010-10-14">October 14, 2010</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Julia Miller, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from scans of public domain
            material produced by Microsoft for the Live Search
            Books site.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The American Nations;</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Or,</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Outlines of A National History;</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Of The</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Ancient and Modern Nations</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Of</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">North and South America</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">By Prof. C. S. Rafinesque.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Volume I.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Philadelphia</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Published by C. S. Rafinesque,</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">No. 110 North Tenth Street.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1836</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='i'/><anchor id='Pgi'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Prospectus.</head>

<p>
Published quarterly at Five Dollars in
advance for Six Numbers or Volumes, similar
to this, of nearly 300 pages&mdash;each separate
Number sold for one Dollar, or more
when they will contain maps and illustrations.
</p>

<p>
A list of Agents will be given hereafter.
At present the principal Booksellers may
act as such.
</p>

<p>
The Names of the Subscribers will be
printed in a subsequent Number.
</p>

<p>
It is contemplated to conclude these annals
and their illustrations in 12 Numbers
or Volumes. Therefore the whole cost to
subscribers will only be $10, for which a
complete American Historical Library will
be obtained.
</p>

<p>
By remitting $5 to the author, six Volumes
are secured whatever be their future
price, and will be sent by mail: a similar
sum will be due when the 7th number is
issued. Those who may prefer to pay $10
at once, will be deemed Patrons of the
work.
</p>

<p>
Whoever subscribes and pays for 5 sets,
is entitled to a 6th gratis. Agents will be
allowed 20 per cent commission.
</p>

<p>
The price of this Number by itself is One
Dollar, or Five Dollars for Six copies.
</p>

<p>
It contains an introduction, general view,
account of materials and cataclysms, the
Linapi and Haytian annals, with the Haytian
Language, notes, tables, &amp;c.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Dedication.</head>

<p>
To The
</p>

<p>
Society Of Geography
</p>

<p>
Of Paris.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gentlemen</hi>:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
To you I dedicate this work, result of long and
weary researches. This homage is due to the public
approbation you gave to my first analogous labor, my
Memoirs or Series of Researches on the Origin of
Mankind: which I endeavored to trace philologically
to the centre of Asia. I had announced long ago this
history of the Americans, the inhabitants of a whole
hemisphere. I had quoted it in my other works.
I now offer the outlines of it under your auspices.
</p>

<p>
You have furnished the example of cultivating
along with Geography, all the auxiliary and connected
sciences, which may enlighten it: particularly the
ancient and modern Ethnography, with Philology one
of its bases. You will see that I have followed this
practice in availing myself of all the sciences to enlighten
the history of mankind, the Ethnography and
annals of nations: above all Philology with Chronology
and Geography.
</p>

<p>
The origins and annals of the black nations, and
of the American nations, were two subjects quite obscure
and neglected, or the least known, of the history
of mankind. Nobody has undertaken, as yet, the
history of the Negro nations: a labor so difficult and
luckless as to be despised.
</p>

<p>
My memoirs on this despised race, may perhaps
furnish the bases of such history. All the histories
of America are mere fragments or dreams. I have
perceived the possibility and necessity to write a general
and faithful history of this hemisphere. I now
offer the results of this weary labor.
</p>

<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>

<p>
You will perceive in it many things which have
already been said; since it is impossible to write history
without repetitions; but my plan, the whole point
of view, and the results which I draw, are my own.
You will also find many things which were never told
or were very improperly presented. I shall destroy
many errors, hypotheses and conjectures: since in
them alone often consist our works upon America.
</p>

<p>
But I shall not say every thing; where so much
is to be related, all cannot be told: and I shall be
compelled to neglect several minute details. I wish
to trace faithful outlines, rather than write a bulky
work, like our pretending <emph>universal histories</emph>, which
however, dwell only upon one-third of the globe or
even less.
</p>

<p>
I dislike long quotations, and shall seldom employ
them: I quote only when authorities are required
to render an opinion more forcible. Every where else
I merely give the abridgement of my great historical
materials in manuscript, which are arranged by extracts
of authorities, and where they may be sought
for in case of need.
</p>

<p>
Accept, Gentlemen, the respectful homage of
</p>

<p>
The Author.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Philadelphia</hi>,<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>October 22d, 1833</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
In venturing to open a new path in historical
researches on the earth and mankind,
it is incumbent on the bold pioneer
to state his views, or at least to furnish
adequate reasons for deviating so far from
the usual track.
</p>

<p>
While every science and branch of
knowledge is improving, and has, with rapid
strides, made continual advances for fifty
years past or more, is the noble muse of
history to be kept stationary forever, by
compilers and classical plodders? and for
America by the foes of the ancient and
modern nations of a whole hemisphere?
No ... it is time to improve history as
every thing else; to seek the truth and
tell it.
</p>

<p>
As the human mind is yet more swayed
by authorities, than genius or wisdom;
high authorities will be given instead of
long explanations. Ever since the time of
Juvenal, it has been an ungrateful task to
write historical truth: men often prefer to
be amused, deceived, or helped in strife;
than to be instructed, or receive sketches
of former times. Yet there is always a
secret delight in viewing faithful pictures
of ages past, of our ancestors on earth, and
our predecessors on the soil of our homes, or
where we spend the scenes of our own lives.
</p>

<p>
The worthies who have been taken for models
or guides in this arduous undertaking,
are Solomon, Moses, Job, St. Paul, St. Augustine,
Plato, Niebuhr, Humboldt, Malcolm,
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
Gebelin, D'Olivet, Bryant, Adelung, Drummond,
Pritchard, Champollion, Klaproth,
Jones, Wilford, Akbar, Price, Bailly, Russell,
Beattie, Herder, Carli, Barton &amp;c.
They shall speak for themselves, in quotations
of their own words, instead of elaborate
reflexions.
</p>

<p>
From God comes wisdom, knowledge
and understanding&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Solomon</hi> Prov. 2. v. 6.
Those who will seek early wisdom will find
her&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sol.</hi> Pr. 8. v. 17. Hear instruction
and be wise, and refuse it not&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sol.</hi> Pr. 8.
v. 33.
</p>

<p>
ZE this is. SFR book. THU symbol.
LDTH progeny. ADM mankind. BIUM
in manifestation. BRA in realization.
ALEIM angels. ADM mankind. BDMUTH
in identic passage. ALEIM angels.
OSHE worked. ATHU such symbol.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Moses.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Genesis ch, 5. v. 1.</hi> Genuine mosaic
words, and genuine translation word
for word.
</p>

<p>
When I laid the foundations of the earth
... the morning stars sung together, and
the sons of God shouted for joy.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Speech
of God Himself in Job</hi> ch. 38., <hi rend='italic'>Vulgar
translation: the original is still more
striking</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The Hebrew philosophy divided the
world in two hemispheres, the upper was
SHMIM or <hi rend='italic'>Shamaim</hi>, the Heavens&mdash;the
lower was SHEOL; but <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sheol-tahtith</hi>
or inferior, was the place of bad souls and
Rephaim. (The true <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sheol</hi> was America,
or the southern hemisphere). The
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
Jesuit Sanetius thought that Job had spoken
of America.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Peters</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Dissertation
on Job</hi>.
</p>

<p>
It is very possible for modern learning
to understand better the books of Moses,
Orpheus, and those of all ancient nations,
than the Egyptian, Greek and Roman
commentators: because the intellectual
knowledge of languages is improving; and
those ancient writers have, by their genius,
approximated to us, while removed from
the blindness of their ages.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gebelin</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Primitive World</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The letter kills, but the spirit gives life.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>St.
Paul</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Corinth.</hi> II. ch. 3. v. 6. We
use great plainness of speech, and not as
MOSES who put a veil before his face, that
the children of Israel could not stedfastly
look to the end of that which is abolished.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cor.
II. 3. v. 12, 13.</hi>&mdash;and even unto
this day, when Moses is read, the veil is
upon their heart, nevertheless when it shall
please the Lord, this veil shall be taken
away.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cor. II. 3. v. 15, 16.</hi>
</p>

<p>
To have a right apprehension of words
or names, is a good step to the knowledge
of things.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Plato</hi> <hi rend='italic'>in Cratylo</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The confusion of words is the cause of
all disputes and sects.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>D'Israeli.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The obscure ages demand bold hypotheses
or total neglect, contradictions are
inseparable from days of tradition.&mdash;There
exist no instance of a people really savage
having spontaneously advanced to civilization.
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
Savage men are degenerated or
imperfect creatures.... Words and even few
are the rules of analogies in nations.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Niebuhr</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Roman History, Vol. I.</hi>
</p>

<p>
It is manifest that there are noble resources
(for history) still remaining, if we
will but apply ourselves to diligent enquiry.
There are in every climate some scattered
fragments of original history, some
traces of a primitive and universal language.
<hi rend='italic'>Even America would contribute
to this purpose, the more rude the monuments,
the more ancient they may possibly
prove, and afford greater light on
enquiry.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bryant, Mythology</hi>; conclusion
of the work.
</p>

<p>
To accumulate materials without generalizing
any idea is a method as sterile in
history as in natural philosophy.&mdash;The
geology of America does not differ essentially
from that of the old world, the strata
and the emersion from the waters are not
newer: species long extinct have also preceded
those now peopling the earth, the
waters and the air.&mdash;The problem of the
first population of America is no more the
province of history, than the questions on
the origin of plants and animals. When
we shall better know the brown men of
Africa, with those of the north and east of
Asia, the American nations will be less
insulated&mdash;They have extended from lat.
68 N. to 55 S. or 123 degrees of latitude,
in plains and mountains, assuming various
complexions and stature. If Africa has
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
140 languages, America has still more;
resembling in this, the Caucasus, Italy before
the Romans; but they are susceptible
of classification into families. The multiplicity
of languages is a very ancient phenomenon,
perhaps those which we call
American, belong no more to America, than
the Magyar and Choud or Finn to Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Humboldt</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>American Researches, Introduction</hi>.
</p>

<p>
If we desire to be fully informed of a
nation's history, we must not reject the
fables under which the few traces that remain
of its origin are concealed. These,
however extravagant, always merit attention
they have an influence on the character
of the people to whom they relate.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>First
words of</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Malcolm</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>History of Persia</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The Chinese often call the king, the
kingdom and the nation by the same name,
nay, even also the capital city.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Regis</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>History of Corea, in Duhalde China</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The cradle or first seat of mankind was
in Asia, between lat. 30 and 50; which is
also the native place of all the domestic
animals, fruits and grains.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Adelung, Bailly,
Higgins, &amp;c.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Genesis was a compilation of Moses
from older annals, some perhaps by Noah
himself.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Revd. Mr. Davies, Herder.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The patriarchs of Moses and Pitris of
Hindus were nations, personifications of
early tribes.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Drummond, D'Olivet, Wilford.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The early gods and kings of Greece and
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
Italy, were probably tribes, the chiefs and
followers being called by the same name.
This is true also of the various Hercules
or wandering Heroes.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Dodwell, Jamieson.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Trying them by the languages, the Americans
will appear to be children of the earliest human
families.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Barton</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Physical
Journal</hi>.
</p>

<p>
A flood of historical light has lately flown
from India and Asia; but we lack still the
real annals of Thibet: Polynesia and America
may yet supply many facts and fill
some blanks.&mdash;The original seat of civilization
was between the Ganges and the
Nile, the Caspian and the ocean.&mdash;The
first tribes after the flood were fishermen
and Frugivores, next hunters who did
spread north east as far as America, and
shepherds south west, as far as Cape of
Good hope.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Pritchard</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Physical History
of Man</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The genealogy of the kings of England
is derived direct from Noah in 25 generations
only, to Cerdic first king of Wessex
in 495; and through <hi rend='smallcaps'>Sceaf</hi> born in the
ark! giving more than 125 years for each
generation, which is impossible, and proves
these names, successive tribes or dynasties till
Woden.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ingram</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Saxon Chronicle</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The Ethiopians, Nubians and Egyptians
are a peculiar race, perhaps in Africa before
the flood.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Champollion</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Systeme
Hieroglyphique</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The languages are better guides than
physical characters for researches on mankind,
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
and roots more important than grammars.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Klaproth.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Language belongs to man from origin,
he never was a dumb animal, else he would
always have remained so. All languages have something
in common, and something peculiar.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Beattie</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Theory of Language</hi>.
</p>

<p>
A thousand nations with a thousand
idioms, are spread over a thousand places
on earth. Thrown against each other like
the waves of the sea, they blend and tend
to unity. Several rival languages are
formed, polished by contract, which overspread
the earth; and break to pieces as
well as nations and empires. Others arise
from their ruins, and strive again for ascendency,
until at last a people and language,
son and daughter of all the previous nations
and idioms, heirs of their dominion and
wealth; shall perhaps invade the whole
earth, and produce again the unity of
speech and rule.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>D'Olivet</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>End of Hebrew
Grammar</hi>.
</p>

<p>
It is said, <hi rend='italic'>In the beginning God made
Heaven and Earth</hi>, that is to say, the
seeds of heaven and earth, since their matter
was yet in confusion in a potential
way.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>St. Augustine</hi> <hi rend='italic'>on Genesis</hi>.
</p>

<p>
In the whole <hi rend='italic'>Mosaic text</hi> there is no
Eden, no tree, no apple, no rib, no woman,
no snake, no ark ... but other words
thus improperly translated to veil the
sense.... Adam is not a man, but mankind,
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Aish</foreign>
intellectual men, <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Ashe</foreign> mate or
potent will, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hue</hi> our Eve is living existence!...
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
The names of patriarchs are
all expressive of operations of mankind....
Yet Moses' Unity of God, and Belief in
Immortality is evident throughout; although
so obscured by the translation as
to have been doubted.... Moses with
his veils is made absurd; raising the veils
he appears wise, deep, consistent, even
more enlightened than our age on many
points.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>D'Olivet</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Notes on Genesis</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Whenever the numerical letters of Moses
are taken in their material sense, inextricable
difficulties have arisen; and which
is the true version out of the 3 is doubtful:
the deep mosaic meaning and import shall
never be known, until the ancient lost science
of numbers is restored, which was
once known from China to Egypt and
Europe.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>D'Olivet</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>last note</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Eblis or Satan was disgraced from Heaven,
where Rezoan was his successor, and
exiled to Seyestan, with the Snake and
Peacock tribes his followers, Adam was
exiled to Ceylon, Eve to Arabia &amp;c.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Price</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Translation of Abijauffer's History
of Arabia</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Menu was Adam, but there are seven
Menus, the seventh was Noah.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sir W.
Jones</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Laws of Menu</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Wilford.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Babylonian empire begun 530 years
after the flood, 2790 years after Adam.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Russell</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Connection of Sacred History</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Primitive history is under a veil, involved
in fables; but all ancient fables have a historical
base.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Bailly</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>on Atlantis</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>

<p>
Before Adam God created the <hi rend='italic'>Dives</hi>
(angels) who had 72 kings or <hi rend='italic'>Sol-i-man</hi>
for 7000 years, and after them the <hi rend='italic'>Peris</hi>
govern for 2000 years.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Herbelot</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Oriental
Library</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Noah dwelt near Cabul and Cashmir, his
Ararat was in the Imalaya mountains.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Shuckford,
Wells</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Sacred Geography &amp;c.</hi>
</p>

<p>
As early as 4600 years before Christ,
there was a communication between the
Americans and the east by astronomical
coincidences.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Carli</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>American Letters</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Two great wars or <hi rend='italic'>Mahabharat</hi> followed
by dispersions of mankind, happened in India
in 3236 and 2501 (before our era);
and the Indian solar empire of <hi rend='italic'>Berhut</hi> at
Inderput now Delhi, ascends 16 generations
beyond the first, at least to 3750
years B. C.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Institutes of the Emperor</hi>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Akbar</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>translated by</hi>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gladwin</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Such are my guides. Are not those
quotations sufficient?
</p>

<p>
For my rules of criticism, I have taken
for guide, <hi rend='italic'>Isaac Taylor's</hi> excellent history
of the transmission of ancient books, London,
1827. They may be analysed as follows,
from his own summary.
</p>

<p>
1. If the records of antiquity could be deprived
of their authority, we should also be
deprived of intelligence, liberty and religion!
</p>

<p>
2. Dates are of little importance; being
anciently expressed by letters, they are
liable to errors. The Greeks and all eastern
christians reckon 5508 years from
Adam to Christ.
</p>

<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>

<p>
3. Geography and natural facts are open
to criticism.
</p>

<p>
4. Wonders, monsters, miracles, are not
always fabulous, but doubtful. Natural
phenomena if unconnected with omens,
may be right.
</p>

<p>
5. Speeches and secret motives do not
belong to history, they are ornaments of
rhetoric or mere surmises.
</p>

<p>
6. Facts are only to be attended to, they
become more certain, if corroborated by
monuments, inscriptions, coins &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
7. The silence of a historian does not
invalidate the assertions of others.
</p>

<p>
8. Contradictions, exaggerations, prejudices,
party spirit, national dislike, must
be allowed for. The arrogance of the
Greeks and Chinese, who call barbarians,
nations as good as they, is shameful, and
must be noticed, as well as errors arising
from hiding defeats &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
The independent sources of history besides
writers are, 1. remains of literature.
2. Chronological documents and astronomical
calculations, 3. Natural features of
nature and mankind, with permanent physical
facts, 4. Permanent institutions, manners,
monuments, languages &amp;c. Lastly,
remote facts may be certain; although a
long while elapsed: whatever be the consequence;
and even if the first evidence
may have been erroneously transmitted, or
not perspicuous. But accumulated evidence
ought never to be doubted.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>General Introduction.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Natural Regions
of America.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ancient and Modern
Nations.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Historical Periods.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
Since our Globe is better known, it is no
longer divided into 4 Continents; but must
be divided into 3 great parts of the world
or <foreign rend='italic'>Tholomeres</foreign>, each containing 3 lesser
divisions or <foreign rend='italic'>Geotomes</foreign>, viz:
</p>

<p>
I. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Protholia</hi> or <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tholarkon</hi>, the ancient
world, containing, 1. Asia, 2. Africa, 3.
Europe, which are continents.
</p>

<p>
II. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Neotholia</hi> or <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hesperia</hi>, the new
world, containing, 1. <hi rend='italic'>Atalia</hi> or North America,
2. <hi rend='italic'>Columbia</hi> or South America, which
are two continents ... and 3. the <hi rend='italic'>Antilles</hi>
or West Indies, the Archipelagos to the
East and North, Carib and Lucayes islands.
</p>

<p>
III. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Oceania</hi> or <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tholonesia</hi>, the
Oceanic or Insular world, containing, 1. <hi rend='italic'>Australia</hi>,
which is a continent, 2. <hi rend='italic'>Meganesia</hi> or the
great Islands from Japan till Ceylan and
Madagascar, 3. <hi rend='italic'>Polynesia</hi>, the small Eastern
Islands. These two last form immense
groups of archipelagos, or clustered islands.
</p>

<p>
Therefore the terrestrial world includes
6 continents, and 3 groups of archipelagos,
forming 9 geotomes.
</p>

<p>
It is of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Neotholia</hi> that I write the history,
of this third of the world, named likewise
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
America, or the two Americas; a double
continent, crowned in the East and towards
the two poles by archipelagos.
</p>

<p>
Such an extensive part of the world,
reaching nearly to both poles, offers to
our notice and researches a crowd of objects,
nations and events. If our universal
histories which are confined to a small part
only of the old world, form already bulky
collections; it would be equally so with
America, if we had complete annals of it.
But, notwithstanding the scanty materials
which have reached us on its ancient history;
the modern annals and the old traditions
of the nations dwelling there, afford many
facts: and many auxiliary means contribute
to enlarge the previous history, in unfolding
the origins and revolutions of the nations
and empires of both Americas. Thus, we
shall often have to make a choice or abridge
these materials, particularly in these outlines
of a general history.
</p>

<p>
Formerly, historians wrote chiefly chronicles
of the empires, kingdoms and republics;
which were often mere biographies of monarchs
and chiefs, conquerors and tyrants.
We begin now to think more of mankind
and the nations. I shall follow this principle,
and trace at last a national history of
America; this subject is so new, that we
have not even yet a good history of mankind
in Europe, much less in Asia and
Africa.
</p>

<p>
Having dwelt in this continent since 1802,
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
having settled in it since 1815, and having
travelled in it every year to study the monuments
and productions thereof: it was since
1818 that I began to conceive the possibility
of raising the veil that was thrown over
the annals of this third of the world. I
have visited the public libraries of Washington,
Baltimore, Philadelphia, New-York,
Boston, Albany, Lexington, &amp;c. to consult
all the historical works on America, and
every other part of the world. I have read
nearly all the travels in America and other
distant countries. In the Ebeling library
deposited in that of Cambridge University
near Boston, I have found many ancient
works on America, often unique in the
United States, and very rare even in Europe.
There is but a small number of rare
works, which I have not yet been able to
see; I shall give a list of them, in order
that it may be ascertained whether they
contain facts that have escaped me. My
researches upon the languages and monuments
of America, will compensate this
unavoidable neglect, since they exceed
whatever had been undertaken of the kind.
I have thus endeavored to collect and compare
all the facts relating to my subject.
</p>

<p>
I have not imitated, therefore, the lazy
writers, who have pretended to give us
histories of America, and have commonly
produced mere sketches of it, full of neglects
and defects. Such were Robertson,
Holmes, Touron, Herrera, &amp;c., with a crowd
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
of imitators and compilers, which confine
themselves to some years, or a single region,
or the mere first Spanish invasions.
They have, however, acquired some reputation
either by style or manner; but they
have degraded history, by giving sketches
instead of it. We must except Herrera,
who does not shine by the style; but is at
least a faithful annalist of the Spanish deeds
and colonies during 62 years, from 1492
till 1552. But Robertson, although praised
for his style, is only his unfaithful and imperfect
imitator, and the obvious slanderer
of the American nations.
</p>

<p>
A complete criticism of the writers on
America, would be desirable; but cannot
enter into the plan of these historical outlines;
although it may find a place in ulterior
illustrations. It will be sufficient now
to indicate that the best works, or those
which furnish the greatest number of historical
materials, are the old writers and
travellers, since the modern historians
and travellers (except Humboldt and a
few more) appear to forget whatever has
already been written on America.
</p>

<p>
The historian of such an extensive continent,
should not be a mere annalist; but
he ought to know well all the comparative
sciences, sisters of history, such as chronology,
geography, biography, archeology,
ethnography, philology, &amp;c. He ought
also to be a philosopher and a philanthropist,
to know the natural sciences which
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
become connected with history by civilization,
agriculture, and geology; he ought,
above all, to be impartial and a good critic,
in order to discard national prejudices, and
avoid the blunders of credulity or imposture.
What historian has ever united such
acquirements? I have tried to acquire
them: Have I succeeded? I offer my
writings as the answer.
</p>

<p>
My method has been to make copious
extracts of all the authors that I read.
These materials already form a collection
of over one hundred books of 6000 pages
on the history of the earth and mankind:
whereof I avail myself for all my historical
works. I have formed besides another collection
of iconographic illustrations, maps,
plans, monuments, views, portraits, alphabets,
symbols, implements, costumes, &amp;c.;
which may serve for proofs and atlas of
these works, published or manuscript. This
tellurian iconography, chiefly American,
consists already in ten great books or portfolios;
having little hope to be enabled to
publish them, I wish they might be deposited
in a great public library, where
they might be consulted.
</p>

<p>
Instead of beginning this history of the
Americans by generalities, I should wish to
conclude the work by such results; but it
may frequently be needful to deviate from
this plan, and present results as they happen
to arise from the facts and events.
</p>

<p>
The different parts of the Western Hemisphere
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
are often distantly remote, and
insulated, or little connected in their historical
relations. Austral America and
Boreal America have for instance hardly
any historical connection: they are as
widely separated as China and Europe;
but all the central parts of America are
intimately connected, above all the mountain
regions from Mexico to Chili, which
offer the same relation of civilization, languages
and annalogies, as the Hindu-European
regions and nations.
</p>

<p>
The Neotholian Hemisphere contains
many distinct regions; but the natural or
physical regions are not always identic
with the historical regions. The isthmus
of Panama or valley of Choco does not divide
the nation as it does the two continents
of America: and many groups of nations
are intermingled throughout. The group
of ancient <hi rend='smallcaps'>Aruac</hi> nations extended from
near Florida through the Antilles, Guyana,
Brazil to Tucuman and Magellania. The
elder group of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tala</hi> or atlantic nations
could be traced from the Ohio to Mexico,
Guatimala and South America in the west.
</p>

<p>
Notwithstanding this fact, it is useful to
keep in mind the great natural regions of
America, so as to trace through them the
vicissitudes of mankind in ancient and modern
times. Thus we find six such regions
in North America, and six in South America,
with 3 in the Antilles.
</p>

<p>
1. Boreal region, or region of the lakes,
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
stretching across North America, from the
streight of Behring and peninsula Alaska
in the west, to Labrador, Canada and Nova
Scotia in the east. It is distinguished by
a rocky soil, many large lakes and millions
of small ones, surrounded near the pole and
on either side by groups of islands. Its
southern limits are undefined, but Lake
Erie forms one of them.
</p>

<p>
2. The Californian or Oregon region,
stretching from north to south along the
Pacific Ocean from Fuca Strait to Mexico
and Guatimala. It is a region of plains
and hills.
</p>

<p>
3. The Mexican region or central mountains
and table lands from the sources of
the Missouri to Lake Nicaragua, distinguished
by volcanoes, a dry lofty soil, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
4. The Missouri region, extending in
vast grassy plains from latitude 50 to the
Gulf of Mexico.
</p>

<p>
5. The Alleghany region, stretching in
woody hills and mountains from Maine to
Alabama and Illinois. The Ozark mountains
and the whole of New England appear
detached portions of it.
</p>

<p>
6. The Literal Atlantic region, stretching
from Long Island to Florida, Mexico,
Yucatan and Honduras, forming a long
but narrow region of level plains, sands
and marshes, skirted by sandy shores and
islands.
</p>

<p>
The Antilles or West Indies, are all islands;
divided into 3 very natural groups.
</p>

<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>

<p>
1. The large and hilly Islands of Jamaica,
Cuba, Hayti, Boriquen.
</p>

<p>
2. The Lucayes or Bahama Islands
north of them, low and chiefly of coral
formations.
</p>

<p>
3. The Carib Islands east and south,
commonly volcanic.
</p>

<p>
The regions of South America are 1.
That of the Andes or high volcanic mountains
extending from Santa Marta to the
Island of Chiloé, stretching branches east
as far as Cumana, and east of Peru. The
hills of Panama from Nicaragua to Choco,
are a detached part of it, probably once an
island of the size of Cuba. Also the Magellanic
or Austral region, including the
hills and islands south of Chili, all detached
from the Andes, with the archipelagos of
Chiloé, Chonos, Fuego, Austral, Falkland,
&amp;c. often volcanic.
</p>

<p>
2. The Atacama region, or lowlands
along the Pacific Ocean from the valleys of
Darien and Choco to Chili, distinguished
by sterility.
</p>

<p>
3. The Pampas or region of unwooded
plains east of the Andes from the strait of
Magellan to Paraguay and Chaco.
</p>

<p>
4. The region of Brazil, distinguished by
fertile hills, mountains and valleys, forming
a vast group of high lands connected to the
Andes by an isthmus.
</p>

<p>
5. The region of Guyana or Parima, of
shady hills perfectly insulated (once a large
island) by the plains of the Maranon and
Oronoc.
</p>

<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>

<p>
6. The vast equinoctical plains of Oronoc
and Maranon, surrounding the mountains
of Parima: where deserts, swamps and
forests are mixed.
</p>

<p>
These 15 regions are quite natural, distinguished
by peculiar physical, and geological
features; but they do not coincide
with the ethnological regions, where the
American tribes have spread and intermixed.
It would be difficult to state here
even the most striking of these last. It
will be the aim of this work to seek for
them, and ascertain their limits; which
have often varied anciently: while in modern
times the European colonies and
states have invaded them in all directions.
</p>

<p>
Meantime the population of both Americas,
must be distinguished in ancient and
modern.
</p>

<p>
In proceeding from the known to the
unknown: we ascertain that a multitude of
nations have come to America since 1492,
as colonists or visitors. The principal were
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Spanish</hi>: who have colonized or conquered
from New Mexico to Chili, and from
Florida to Buenos Ayres. But they came
not alone, and have brought along with
them as auxiliaries. 1. Italians, 2. Flemish,
3. Biscayans, 4. Canarians, &amp;c., while as
slaves 5. Moors of Mauritania, and 6. Many
African-negro nations.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Portugueze</hi>: who have colonized the
whole of Brazil, and brought there besides
many Negro nations, some Moors, Gypsies,
Chinese, &amp;c.
</p>

<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>English</hi>: Who have colonized the
whole eastern side of North America, Jamaica
and other islands of Antilles, with
parts of Yucatan, Honduras, Guyana, &amp;c.
But they have brought with them, the
Welsh, Scotch, Irish, Germans, Jews and
many African nations.
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>French</hi>: They colonized Canada,
Lousiana, Hayti, several Carib islands,
Cayenne in Guyana, &amp;c., and although
conquered in North America and Hayti,
their language remains. They brought
along the Provençals, Bretons, Basks,
speaking distinct languages, with several
African nations.
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>Scandinavians</hi>: Who partly settled
in North America since the 10th century,
did laterly colonize again Groenland, with
Delaware and some Carib Islands. They
include the Norwegians, Danes and Swedes.
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='italic'>Dutch-Hollanders</hi>: Sent colonies to
New-York, Surinam, Curazao, &amp;c. brought
Gypsies, Germans and Africans.
</p>

<p>
7. <hi rend='italic'>Russians</hi>: Have invaded and partly
settled the north west shores and islands
of North America; bringing there Cozacs,
Calmucs, and several other Tartarian subjects.
</p>

<p>
8. Besides these, several other nations
have laterly visited America, or settled
therein, blending with the above. All the
nations of Europe, even Hungarians, Polanders,
Greeks and Turks, have been
brought there. Pirates of all nations, even
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
Algerines, have wandered to America.
Almost all the nations of Africa have been
led there in slavery. Asia has sent Jews,
Hindus, Gypsies or Zinganis, Chinese and
Tartars: while Oceania has sent Malays,
Madagascars, Hawayans, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
This well known fact of the various and
anomalous modern population of both Americas
within 3 or 4 centuries, will greatly
help us to form a more correct estimate of
the ancient population and colonization of
such vast countries during many thousand
years previous to 1492.
</p>

<p>
It is not yet suitable to give here a complete
list of all the ancient nations, who
have, or may have colonized the Western
hemisphere: this can only be done afterwards
as a result of the instituted enquiries
on the subject. Meantime I state as highly
probable, even by mere analogy, that all
the nearest nations of the Atlantic or Pacific
Oceans, in the Eastern hemisphere, have
either visited or colonized the Americas;
particularly from the east, the bold navigators,
Atlantes, Pelagians, Phenicians, Lybyans,
Etruscans, &amp;c., and from the west
the ancient tribes of Tartars and Chinese,
the Polynesians, &amp;c. We shall throughout
these historical outlines find ample proofs
of this fact, exploding the erroneous belief
that a single nation could have populated
the whole of the Western Hemisphere. It
shall appear also that these early settlers
must have brought along many foreign
tribes, as auxiliaries, vassals or slaves.
</p>

<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>

<p>
In my Atlantic Journal of 1832 will be
found a kind of classification of the ancient
nations of both Americas, divided into 25
groups, 14 in North, 11 in South America.
But this first attempt, cannot be perfect:
it requires a close study of all the American
languages, before we can ascertain correctly
all their mutual affinities, and reduce
each to the real parent group. Meantime
this attempt, and the further correction of
it in this work, will become very useful historical
bases. I give therefore the list of
the 25 groups, with a well known nation
and language as the type, to which others
may be gradually reduced.
</p>

<p>
In North America 1. <hi rend='italic'>Uski</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Innuit</hi>,
type the Esquimaux.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Ongwi</hi>, type the Hurons and Iroquois.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Linni</hi>, type the Lanapi or Delawares.
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>Wacash</hi>, type the Chopunish, and
Nutkas.
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>Skerreh</hi>, type the Panis.
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='italic'>Nachez</hi>, type the Cados and Chetimachas.
</p>

<p>
7. <hi rend='italic'>Capaha</hi>, types the Washas or Ozages,
and Dacotas or Sioux.
</p>

<p>
8. <hi rend='italic'>Chactah</hi>, types the Chactahs and
Chicasas.
</p>

<p>
9. <hi rend='italic'>Otali</hi>, Tzulukis or Cherokis.
</p>

<p>
10. <hi rend='italic'>Atalan</hi>, type the Tarascas.
</p>

<p>
11. <hi rend='italic'>Otomi</hi>, type the Otomis.
</p>

<p>
12. <hi rend='italic'>Anahuac</hi>, type the Aztecas.
</p>

<p>
13. <hi rend='italic'>Maya</hi>, types the Mayas and Huaztecas.
</p>

<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>

<p>
14. <hi rend='italic'>Chontal</hi>, type the Tzendals and
Chols.
</p>

<p>
In South America 15. <hi rend='italic'>Aruac</hi>, types the
Haytians, Aruacs, Taos, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
16. <hi rend='italic'>Calina</hi>, types the Caribs and Tamanacs.
</p>

<p>
17. <hi rend='italic'>Puris</hi>, type the Maypuris.
</p>

<p>
18. <hi rend='italic'>Yarura</hi>, types the Guaraos and Betoys.
</p>

<p>
19. <hi rend='italic'>Cuna</hi>, type the Dariens.
</p>

<p>
20. <hi rend='italic'>Mayna</hi>, type the Panos.
</p>

<p>
21. <hi rend='italic'>Maca</hi>, type the Muyzcas.
</p>

<p>
22. <hi rend='italic'>Guarani</hi>, type the Tupis and Omaguas.
</p>

<p>
23. <hi rend='italic'>Mara</hi>, type the Quichuas and Aymaras.
</p>

<p>
24. <hi rend='italic'>Lulé</hi>, types the Vilelas and Mbayas.
</p>

<p>
25. <hi rend='italic'>Chili</hi>, type the Chilians.
</p>

<p>
Notwithstanding the condensed form of
these outlines, the ample materials to be
brought together, will extend them perhaps
beyond the desirable limits. In order to
lessen this difficulty and yet omit nothing
that is new or important, the work will be
divided into three series.
</p>

<p>
1st. The annals of South America, where
many generalities will be introduced, that
need not be repeated in the 2d series, on
the annals of North America.
</p>

<p>
3d. Illustrations of these outlines, where
will be thrown and collected all the collateral
proofs, documents, vocabularies of
languages, manuscript facts and events,
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
essential quotations, and results of all the
investigations.
</p>

<p>
The Peruvian and Austral regions of
South America will first be introduced,
because of paramount importance. By
the Peruvian region is meant the whole
western part of South America from the
equator to the southern tropic, and by Austral
America, the whole of it from that
tropic to the Magellanic Islands. The
gulf of Rio Plata and the river Paraguay,
appear to divide these regions from Brazil,
both physically and historically. Austral
America includes the countries and nations
of Chili, Tucuman, Chaco, Buenos Ayres,
Patagonia and Magellania; but it shall
often be needful to mention their neighbors,
with whom they are more or less related,
and even distant nations that are not always
strangers to them.
</p>

<p>
The ancient nations of Austral America
are the least known on many accounts, and
those on whom most fables and systems
have been based. It is there that dwell
the <hi rend='italic'>Patagons</hi>, who have been believed a
peculiar species of giants; and those tribes
of Chaco, &amp;c., which Azara has deemed
peculiar men, with languages without affinities
with any other: which will easily be
proved to be quite false.
</p>

<p>
If America has had an aboriginal population,
or <hi rend='italic'>Autoctons</hi>, men born from the
soil: it is there they should be found, driven
to the south and those remote climes
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
by the ancient colonies of other nations;
and they should offer features, complexions,
languages and manners totally different
from any other. If all the Americans derive
from ancient colonies, it is still there
that ought to be found the primitive tribes,
driven on by the subsequent colonies and
tribes. Therefore these Austral tribes are
exceedingly interesting to study as the most
ancient relics of American population.
</p>

<p>
But the origin of the American nations
and tribes are only to be considered as a
branch of their history. The accounts of
their dispersion and successive settlements,
the history of the events which they have
remembered and transmitted to us by traditions
or annals, those of the empires which
have been founded there in ancient and
modern times, the study of their civilization
and ethnography ... offer surely much
more interest, and a wide field of historical
facts or enquiries.
</p>

<p>
It appears that as soon as we speak of
the ancient Americans, we ought to cut
the gordian knot, and say whence they
came. I do not wish to explain beforehand,
all my views on this subject. I wish
to reserve them for the results of the enquiries
to be pursued in this work. Yet to
satisfy the general curiosity expressed on
the subject, I may venture to say that I
have not yet found in either Americas, any
people or tribe totally different from any
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
other, or without philological affinities: nor
with features, complexions, and other physical
characters quite peculiar. But instead,
all the ancient American tribes have numerous
affinities between each other, and
with races of mankind in the Eastern
hemisphere: both physical and moral, as
well as philological.
</p>

<p>
If the American nations sprung from
ancient colonies; it is among the primitive
population of the earth, that their parents
must be sought and found: since America
appears to have been partly peopled even
before the flood. Therefore the systems
which would derive them all from the Phenicians,
Jews, Chinese, Tartars of later
ages, or any single people whatever, must
be absurd and improbable: since traces of
many ancient nations are found in this
western hemisphere.
</p>

<p>
It has always appeared probable to me
that most of the ancient colonies to America,
must have come there by the nearest
and most direct way; the same nearly followed
again by Columbus in 1492: either
from north Africa or south Europe. This
becomes still more probable if there were
formerly a land or large islands in the Atlantic
Ocean; of which we have ample
proofs. Nearly all the nations from Florida
and Mexico to Chili, appear to have
reached America from the east, through
the tropical islands or Antilles; but the
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
ancestors of these emigrating tribes, dwelt
once in Asia, which appears the cradle of
mankind.
</p>

<p>
However, many nations of Brazil and Guyana
are more recent and of African origin;
while nearly all those of North America
appear to have reached America by the
opposite direction of Eastern Asia, through
Alaska or the Streight of Behring, once an
Isthmus. Therefore the Colonial tribes
came here from the East, and the North
West. It is more doubtful that any came
from the West or Polynesia.
</p>

<p>
What is now needful, is to trace these
colonies, their travels, epochas, and ascertain
the nations which they have produced
in both Americas. This I will endeavour
to do, without being prevented by the difficulties
of the task. I shall always seek to
ascertain the true names of each nation
or tribe: which have often been disguised
under a crowd of nicknames and erroneous
orthographies. These names when thus
restored will often furnish an original key,
to supply the scarcely known languages, or
lost traditions.
</p>

<p>
The Brigands who brought desolation
over both Americas during two centuries,
and the careless travellers who visited them
in search of wealth, took little notice of the
languages and traditions of their victims
or foes. Thus we have to regret the loss
of many valuable materials, merely indicated.
However, a few enlightened visitors,
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
and the missionaries have preserved some
of them. The first attempt of the kind was
the outlines of historical songs and traditions
of Hayti, collected as early as 1498
by friar Roman, at the request of Columbus;
printed by his son, and by Barcias.
Yet this valuable document has escaped
the notice of nearly all the writers on America!
evident proof of utter carelessness or
neglect.
</p>

<p>
Piedrahita has given some of the historical
traditions of the Muyzcas; Juarros
the annals of the Toltecas of Guatimala;
Ayeta and Herrera those of the Mayas of
Yucatan. Yet they have been neglected
by our historians. They have merely dwelt,
and even sparingly, on the annals of Mexico
and Peru. We have besides fragments on
the early history of the Ongwis, Linapis,
Apalachis, Caribs, Dariens, and a few more;
but we have to regret the loss of the written
annals of many civilized nations, the Tarascas,
Huaztecas, Zapotecas, Nicaraguas,
Chontals, Chilians, Panos, &amp;c. Some of
which may perhaps be yet partly recovered,
as those of the Ongwis and Linapis have
lately been.
</p>

<p>
It is only since last age that the study of
comparative philology has begun to be
appreciated: and quite recently that languages
have been made subservient to historical
researches. Pigafetta had, however,
set the examples as early as 1520 to collect
American vocabularies, of which he gave
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
two, the Brazilian and Patagon: which
are quite important, since by them we
trace both tribes seen by him to the <hi rend='smallcaps'>Aruac</hi>
race. For lack of frequent ancient vocabularies,
we must often grope in the dark;
but I do not despair to be able to restore
many lost languages, by fragments escaped
from the common ruin. I have already
succeeded with the <hi rend='italic'>Taino</hi> of Hayti, the
<hi rend='italic'>Cahiri</hi> of Trinidad,
<hi rend='italic'>Talega</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Apalachi</hi>
of North America, the <hi rend='italic'>Chontal</hi> of central
America, the <hi rend='italic'>Colla</hi> of Peru, and the <hi rend='italic'>Séké</hi>
of old Chili; whereby I shall draw some
happy conclusions.
</p>

<p>
Asia has been the country of fables, Africa
of monsters, and America of systems,
for those who prefer opinions to reality.
The systems and hypotheses of philosophy
or ignorance upon America, exceed all the
Asiatic fables. A crowd of prejudices,
false opinions and fantastic theories, have
been asserted on this hemisphere, often
mistaking a small part of it for the whole.
Some have declared all the Americans a
red, beardless, naked and barbarous race,
or a peculiar species of men. Others that
they came out of the ground or from the
clouds, or over a bridge, instead of boats
or on the ice. Others that they are all
Jews, or Malays, or Tartars. Lastly, even
that Eden was here and Noah built the ark
in America! All these systems and fifty
more brought forth by ignorance or pride,
are based upon the most absurd proofs, or
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
a few insulated facts: while there are historical
facts easy to prove that are neglected
or forgotten.
</p>

<p>
Thus it is a positive fact that many
ancient nations of the east, such as the
Lybians, Moors, Etruscans, Phenicians,
Hindus, &amp;c. had heard of America, or
knew nearly as much of it, as we did of
Australia and Polynesia 100 years ago.
It is as certain that America contained
anciently, as even now, a crowd of distinct
nations and tribes; some of which were
quite civilized, perhaps as much as the
Spaniards led by Columbus; the others
more barbarous, but not entirely savage.
There were but few, if any, real savages in
America, dwelling in woods without social
ties; most of them were wandering tribes
of fishermen or hunters.
</p>

<p>
There were formerly in America as now,
tribes of all complexions, as elsewhere:
yellowish, olive, coppery, tawny, redened,
brown, incarnate or white, and even blackened
or negro-like. Tall and dwarfish men
from 8 to 4 feet in size, called giants and
pygmies&mdash;men with various frames, skulls,
and features, of all the sorts found in the
eastern hemisphere.
</p>

<p>
The Americans had long before Columbus,
large cities; built of stones, bricks or
wood, with walls, ditches, temples, palaces.
Some of which were of immense size and
population. One of them <hi rend='italic'>Otolum</hi> near
Palenque was 28 miles long, equal to
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
Thebes, Babylon and Kinoj in size and
monuments. Nearly all the ancient sciences
and useful primitive arts were known
in America, as well as commerce and navigation,
symbolic and alphabetic writing,
nearly all the Asiatic religions, &amp;c. The
most civilized nations had even colleges
and universities, canals and paved roads,
splendid temples and monuments, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
It would be tedious to designate all what
has not been told, or been very unworthily
noticed, upon America. The whole of
these outlines shall be comments upon the
forgotten facts relating to this third of the
world. Such as are found recorded by
chance in one or few authors, scattered in
1000 volumes, unsought and unnoticed by
nearly all the other writers.
</p>

<p>
Respecting the chronology of the American
annals, it is rather obscure and doubtful;
but perhaps not more so than that of
all ancient nations except the Chinese. It
frequently ascends as far as the floods and
even the creation. The most ancient dates
are found among the Tols or Toltecas and
Atlantes, Mexicans or Aztecas, the Muyzcas,
Ongwis, Linapis, &amp;c. But it is difficult
to make those dates agree among themselves,
or with our oriental dates. However
the American annals may be divided into
great periods, which can be admitted as
certain, and resting points of history at
peculiar epochas.
</p>

<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>

<p>
Here is their tabular view.
</p>

<p>
I. Ancient history, ending with Columbus
in 1492.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Antidiluvian period</hi>, beginning at
the creation, about 6690 years before Columbus
according to the Tols, and ending
with the last cataclysm of Peleg, about
3788 years before Columbus.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Doubtful period</hi>, from that epocha
till the reform of Tol astronomy, 1612 years
before Columbus. This includes several
subordinate periods and epochas.
</p>

<p>
About 3100 years before Columbus, settlement
of the Linapis in Shinaki or Firland
or Oregon in N. W. America.
</p>

<p>
About 2500 years before Columbus, wars
of the Towancas and Ongwis, the hero
Yatatan, &amp;c. in North America.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Certain period</hi>, from 1612 till Columbus'
arrival in 1492. Many lesser periods
and epochas.
</p>

<p>
442, after Christ&mdash;End of the Tollan
kingdom.
</p>

<p>
492,&mdash;Beginning of Atotarho dynasty of
Ongwis.
</p>

<p>
558,&mdash;Empire of Tol-tecas begins in
Anahuac, and lasts till 942.
</p>

<p>
840,&mdash;Beginning of the wars of Zipanas
and Caris in South Peru.
</p>

<p>
947,&mdash;Foundation of the kingdom of
Mayapan by Cuculcan in Yucatan.
</p>

<p>
985,&mdash;Discovery of America by the
Norwegians.
</p>

<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>

<p>
1000,&mdash;Conquest of Quito by the Skiris.
</p>

<p>
1105,&mdash;Beginning of the Incas empire.
</p>

<p>
1322,&mdash;Foundation of Tenuchtitlan or
Mexico.
</p>

<p>
II. Modern history, from 1492 till our
days.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Colonial Period</hi>, from 1492 till 1776.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Independent Period</hi>, beginning in
1776. The foundation of the empire of
Brazil in 1822 may begin a subordinate
period.
</p>

<p>
Each age may bear the name of a wise
legislator or eminent personage: the ages
of modern history are those of 1. Columbus,
2. Las-Casas, 3. William Penn, 4. Washington,
5. Bolivar.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Materials for the history
of the Americans.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Authors,
Documents, Sciences.&mdash;Languages,
Civilization, &amp;c.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
Far from following the example of many
American historians, who often take a single
guide for their crude compilations, or
avoid the trouble to consult all the historical
sources, I have taken care in my researches
to employ all the possible means to reach
the truth, and collect all the facts that are
scattered among a crowd of writers. I
have carefully analysed, compared and
judged the materials, details and events
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
thus procured: nay, all the auxiliary sciences
have afforded additional fragments
or proofs.
</p>

<p>
These materials may be divided into 10
series or kinds
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. Works, printed or manuscript.</l>
<l>2. Documents and monuments.</l>
<l>3. Maps, plans, views, &amp;c.</l>
<l>4. Natural sciences.</l>
<l>5. Ethnography.</l>
<l>6. Traditions and annals.</l>
<l>7. Chronology and astronomy.</l>
<l>8. Languages and philology.</l>
<l>9. Religion, mythologies, &amp;c.</l>
<l>10. Civilization, laws and manners.</l>
</lg>

<p>
The writers upon America are very numerous;
but mostly defective or local. A
number, however, have attempted to consider
the whole continent: the principal
among those containing facts upon all parts
of America are chiefly
</p>

<p>
Herrera, History and Geography of Spanish
America carried till the year 1554.
</p>

<p>
Delaet, Historical Geography of America,
till 1630.
</p>

<p>
Garcias, Origins of the Americans.&mdash;Spanish
work.
</p>

<p>
Carli, American Letters.&mdash;Italian work.
</p>

<p>
Ogilby, History and Geography of America,
till 1670.
</p>

<p>
Raynal, European Settlements in America,
till 1774.
</p>

<p>
Alcedo, Geographical Dictionary of Spanish
America in 1786.&mdash;Spanish work.
</p>

<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>

<p>
Maltebrun, Improved Geography, 1820.
</p>

<p>
Touron, History of America, chiefly
ecclesiastical, and incomplete, 14 volumes
1768-70, in French.
</p>

<p>
Robertson, false History of America or
Spanish Conquests of Mexico or Peru.
</p>

<p>
The collections of travels by Hackluyt,
Purchas, Harris, Ramusio, Barcias, Prevost,
&amp;c.
</p>

<p>
The American researches of Ulloa,
Humboldt, M'Culloh, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
I have consulted and analyzed all these
general works, and many others of less
account; but I have not yet read Hervas
nor Compagnone, knowing them merely
through quotations
</p>

<p>
The first <hi rend='italic'>Bibliotheca Americana</hi> or
catalogue of writers on America, was given
by Kennet in 1701 and 1713. Another
appeared in England in 1719; a third in
France in 1820. They contain the names,
authors, editions, dates, &amp;c. of over 300
works relating to America. Robertson
has given a list of nearly as many, which
he pretends to have consulted, although he
neglected what they tell us. Humboldt
has also a catalogue of 250 authors,
consulted by him. In 1831, Aspinwall
published his American Library containing
771 works; and Warden, in Paris, his
own, containing 977 American works with
133 atlasses and maps.
</p>

<p>
All this does not complete the account
of books on America; since I have seen
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
many omitted in all these catalogues; although
I never could meet some mentioned
there. I will carefully notice them, that it
may be known where I found my materials,
and what may yet have escaped my researches.
I have already consulted upwards
of 600 writers on both Americas, and there
are at least 1000 already printed, I mean
special or local works connected with history.
If we were to add to these the botanists,
naturalists, paltry compilers, and
pamphlets, we might make a catalogue of
3000 works on America, her inhabitants
and productions.
</p>

<p>
I will refer gradually to them, and have
collected them all in my manuscript illustrations;
<hi rend='italic'>materials</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>printed works</hi>. Therefore
we do not lack printed materials: but
the choice of the best is difficult: since
many works merely consist in fables, blunders,
errors, hypotheses and their constant
repetitions: which ought to be rejected in
order to gather facts and the truth. But
we must not reject as pyrrhoniams all that
may clash with our ideas and systems: it
is chiefly needful so recall and restore the
events and facts mentioned by the earliest
travellers and observers.
</p>

<p>
These numerous local writers ought to
be divided into three classes. 1. historians
and annalists, 2. travellers and geographers,
3. antiquarians and philologists. I shall
now merely mention the most useful (which
I have all consulted) upon the Peruvian
and Austral regions of South America.
</p>

<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>

<p>
1st. The principal historians are, 1.
Molina, History of Chili, 2. Funes, Civil
History of Buenos Ayres, Paraguay and
Tucuman, 3. Lavega, History of Peru, 4.
Debrizoffer, history of Abipones, 5. Charlevoix
of Paraguay, 6. Techo, on Ditto,
7, 8. Lozano and Jolis on Chaco, 9. Muratori,
and 10. Renger, Paraguay.
</p>

<p>
2d. The principal writers who have
furnished historical facts, with geographical
and ethnographical materials, are <emph>old travellers</emph>,
1. Pigafetta and Magellan, 2. Cabot,
3. Shmidel, 4. Drake, 5. Cavendish, 6.
Acarete, 7. Knivet, 8. Frezier, 9. Sepp, 10.
Brewer, 11. Nyel, 12. Schmidtmeyer.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The modern travellers are</hi>, 1. Azara, 2.
D'Ulloa, 3. Humboldt, 4. Cook, 5. Byron, 6.
Laperouse, 7. Stevenson, 8. Myers, 9. Heyn,
10. Beaumont, 11. Gillespie, 12. Vidal, 13.
Wedel, 14. King, 15. Morrell, 16. Andrew,
17. Temple, 18. Mawe, 19. Proctor, 20.
Graham, 21. Head, 22. Pernetty.
</p>

<p>
The principal original geographers and
ethnographers are, 1. Fernandez on Chiquitos
1726, 2. Bueno, Ditto 1800, 3. Falkner,
on Patagonia 1774, 4. Molina on Chili
and Cuyo, 5. Lozano on Chaco 1733, 6.
Skinner, Memoirs on Peru, 7. Gili, South
America 1782.
</p>

<p>
3d. Lastly the auxiliary writers on philology,
antiquities and other historical branches
are, 1. Adelung, Vater, Maltebrun, Balbi,
&amp;c., on all American languages, 2. American
researches of Humboldt, Macculoh
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
1829. Those of Depaw and Ranking are
shameful, perverting every thing to support
false systems.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Manuscripts.</hi> There are yet many such
extant on America, in the libraries of both
hemispheres. Clavigero gave a long list
of Mexican Manuscripts. Funes quotes
several on Austral America. There are
several extant in Central America and
South America, in Peru and Brazil. Many
have been lost through wilful neglect, or
destroyed at the Spanish Conquest, the
expulsion of Jesuits, &amp;c. Those in the ancient
languages, Mexican, Tarasca, Tzendal,
&amp;c., are now very rare, and much
esteemed. Those burnt by Zumaraga, the
Mexican Omar, have been often regretted.
Lord Kingborough has lately published
some at a great cost.
</p>

<p>
The manuscripts which I could consult
on South America are but few. Those on
North America are more numerous and
very important; particularly the traditions
of the Linapis, Shawanis, &amp;c., they are
chiefly on wood, bark, skins or Mosaic
strings. But I have received several manuscript
vocabularies of the languages of
Guyana, Brazil, Texas, Mexico, &amp;c. and I
have consulted several manuscripts in the
libraries of Philadelphia.
</p>

<p>
There are, besides, in the public or private
libraries of all the great cities of both
Americas, several interesting historical
works, which have never been published.
</p>

<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>

<p>
There are several in Philadelphia, particularly
the historical collections of Simetierre.
Often the best or most important works
cannot be printed: while a crowd of paltry
compilations are ushered to deceive the
public. This may be deemed a remainder
of the prevailing ignorance and error. Instead
of appreciating the learned and useful
works, the prevailing taste is for historical
romances and systematic fables. It is
needful to seek these previous labors, which
run the risk of being totally lost, if we will
not have again to blush hereafter for these
historical losses.
</p>

<p>
I give the list of such among my own
manuscripts, as have been employed to
write this history. They are yet in my
possession, but I wish to see them deposited
in a great public library; where they might
be consulted.
</p>

<p>
1. Materials for the history, ethnography,
&amp;c. of the Americans, their annals,
chronology, &amp;c. 40 books, begun in 1820,
continued ever since, and not yet closed.
</p>

<p>
2. Vocabularies of the ancient and modern
languages of both Americas, symbols,
glyphs, &amp;c., 4 books, begun 1824.
</p>

<p>
3. Comparative geography and ethnography
of ancient and modern America, 5
books, with maps, &amp;c., begun 1824.
</p>

<p>
4. Ancient monuments of North and
South America, compared with the primitive
monuments of the eastern hemisphere,
3 books and 200 plans, &amp;c., 1822.
</p>

<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>

<p>
5. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tellus</hi>, or the primitive History of
the Earth and Mankind in Protholia, Oceania
and Neotholia, with the ancient and
modern general ethnography, 30 books,
begun in 1821.
</p>

<p>
6. Synglosson, or compared examination
of all languages and nations, 6 books, begun
1825.
</p>

<p>
7. Iconographical Illustrations of all my
historical works and travels, containing
over 1000 maps, plans, views, costumes,
portraits, alphabets, symbols, implements,
&amp;c., in 10 cartoons, begun 1816.
</p>

<p>
8. Travels in North America, in 1802,
3, 4, and from 1815 to 1835. In many
manuscript books and journals.
</p>

<p>
I have often been apprehensive of the
fate of Boturini, for these interesting manuscript
and long researches. This has happened
already for one of my manuscripts.
As early as 1825 I sent to the Academy
of Science in Boston, a manuscript of 240
pages, being an <hi rend='italic'>account of the materials
yet existing for the history of the nations
and tribes of America before Columbus</hi>.
This was for an offered prize of $100: which
was never awarded, although my memoir
was declared the best sent. And instead
of depositing this manuscript in the library
of the American Antiquarian Society as
requested, it has been <emph>lost</emph> or <emph>stolen</emph>. If
never recovered, and that the public may
judge of the merits of it, at such an early
period of my historical studies: I will state
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
the principal results of my enquiries therein;
which tenor, together with their length,
were the ostensible reasons for not awarding
a prize probably never meant to be
awarded.
</p>

<p>
I therein proved in 1825, 1st. that there
are yet materials enough, notwithstanding
the loss of many, for an ancient history of
America.
</p>

<p>
2. That a complete American history
ought to employ and combine all the materials
afforded by geology, geography,
physics, chronology, physiology, ethnology,
archeology, philology, on America, with all
the traditions of the Americans.
</p>

<p>
3. Geology and physical geography indicates
the cradles and ancient settlements
of mankind, the revolutions of nature, the
places unfit for population, the means of
access, probable route of colonies, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
4. America has an ancient geography previous
to 1492, which ought to be restored.
</p>

<p>
5. The coincidence of names of nations
and tribes, afford a comparitive concordance,
indicating ancient connections or
identity.
</p>

<p>
6. The ancient American population,
must have been derived from the nearest
shores of Africa, Europe and Asia. The
points where all the indications and traditions
tend, are the Antilles, next Paria and
Guyana in South America; Anian or Tollan
and Alaska in the N. W with Sucanunga
or Groenland to the N. E.
</p>

<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>

<p>
7. The philological solution of historical
affinities must be sought in the roots of
the languages, their conformity or analogies,
the number of similar sounds, roots
and words; which are susceptible of a
mathematical calculation, and referable to
the theory of probabilities.
</p>

<p>
8. Many primitive nations in all parts of
the earth, may thus be proved to have been
akin or related.
</p>

<p>
9. Noah's flood was nearly general; but
perhaps not universal. His ark or THBE
was perhaps Thibet: and his 3 sons 3 nations
saved there.
</p>

<p>
10. It has been proved that all the antidiluvian
patriarchs were Nations, their long
ages being the duration of dynasties or
states. This opinion may also be entertained
of many other ancient patriarchs or
heads of tribes, every where, by the usual
figure of personification.
</p>

<p>
11. Peleg's flood was volcanic, not so
general as Noah's. There may have been
many successive cataclysms blended in this,
as this has been often mistaken in date for
Noah's.
</p>

<p>
12. The cradle of the Tulans or Mexican
nations, must have been the Tulan of Asia,
since Turan and Tartary. There are many
places called Tula, all over the earth, indicating
settlements of Atlantes.
</p>

<p>
13. The ancient chronology of America
may be restored. Several dates given, a
system proposed.
</p>

<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>

<p>
14. All the races and complexions of
mankind are found in America.
</p>

<p>
15. America was known to the ancient
nations, particularly the Atlantes, Pelagians,
Phenicians, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
16. Some highlands of America were
not covered at Noah's flood, and might become
the azylums of men, animals, and
vegetation. However, but few nations can
be traced to these azylums in America.
</p>

<p>
17. The ancient monuments of both
Americas, are similar to the primitive
monuments of Asia, Africa and Europe.
</p>

<p>
18. The ancient inscriptions of America
can be explained. A key may be found
for all: some are evidently pelagic.
</p>

<p>
19. The religions of the Americans, were
similar to the primitive religions of the
eastern hemisphere.
</p>

<p>
20. The manners and customs, of the
Americans, are very various, and form no
peculiar test.
</p>

<p>
21. Many American nations were highly
civilized, besides the Mexicans and Peruvians:
skilful in agriculture, and the arts,
having cattle, colleges, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
My reward for having ascertained and
proved those facts, was to be denied the
prize, and to have my manuscript mislaid
or lost or stolen! My historical researches
ever since have continued to confirm nearly
all these facts.<note place='foot'>In 1824, I published my first essay
on American history, a pamphlet on the
<hi rend='italic'>Ancient History of Kentucky</hi>, or Central
North America, before 1770. Although
it was a mere rude sketch, it contains
many important historical facts. I was
too little advanced then in philological
studies, to give it their support, and many
of my surmises must be rectified by it.
My late researches have also greatly impaired
the general belief of the Tartarian
origin, and western route of the Mexican
nations.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Documents and monuments.</hi> The
historical titles and proofs, inscriptions,
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
medals, coins, charters, &amp;c., which are so
common elsewhere, are but few as yet, in
America, belonging to early times: most
belong to modern history.
</p>

<p>
There are some ancient inscriptions scattered
in South America; but not yet published.
Molina speaks of one on a pyramid
of Cuyo, which late travellers have not
found. Those of Otolum near Palenqué
in Central America begin to excite great
attention; and I have sought a key for
them.<note place='foot'>I published this presumed key in
1832 in my Atlantic Journal; but many
accurate comparisons are yet required to
confirm my surmises, although the Lybian
analogies are evident.</note>
</p>

<p>
Ancient metallic coins and medals, really
Americans, are exceedingly scarce: yet
there are some in Central America. Several
medals, perhaps foreign and indicating
a communication, have been found, but
again lost or neglected; few have been
figured or explained.
</p>

<p>
Implements, tools, sculptures, objects of
arts, pottery, weapons, &amp;c. of the ancient
Americans are found in all the museums;
but excite little attention, by not being
concentrated, accumulated nor classified.
Many fine specimens of arts have been
melted, or broken and lost. The astronomical
stones of the Mexicans and Muyzcas
have been preserved; but those of Peru
and Central America are lost; as well as
that beautiful one of the Talegas of North
America, a dodecagone, with 144 hieroglyphic
signs, found in the Ohio, and once
kept in a museum of Philadelphia.
</p>

<p>
The ancient monuments of both Americas,
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
are very numerous, indicating a dense
population in places since become wild and
desolate, as in North America, Guyana,
Brazil, &amp;c. They are most numerous in
the central parts of both Americas, and
lessen towards both ends. Yet they are
met from lat. 45 N. to 45 S. They are
very variable in different parts; by no
means identic, indicating different builders
or many degrees of civilization, from the
rudest arts to the most refined: employing
many materials, earth, clay, gravel, stone,
wood, unbaked bricks; being either irregular
cyclopian structures, or regular buildings
of rough or cut stones, <foreign rend='italic'>pizé</foreign> or beaten
clay, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
We do not know as yet one half of those
in existence, and many have never been
described nor figured. Yet they afford
every where, one of the most evident and
certain base of historical researches, confirming
traditions, or revealing the seats of
former empires, their civilization, &amp;c.
They consist chiefly in mounds, altars,
tumuli or tombs, ruined cities, villages and
forts, temples and dwellings; but we find
besides in various places, traces of ancient
palaces, bridges, roads, causeways, canals,
mines, dromes, baths, pyramids, towers,
pillars, rocking stones, walls, wells, pits &amp;c.
They generally resemble the primitive
monuments of the same kind, met with in
the eastern hemisphere, from England and
Ireland to Mauritania and Africa, extending
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
east to Lybia, Syria, Russia, Persia,
Tartary, &amp;c. They have less resemblance
with the monuments of Egypt, Greece,
Rome, India and China; yet some kinds
somewhat assimilate. In fact, there are,
throughout both Americas, three very distinct
classes of monuments, indicating distinct
arts and architecture.
</p>

<p>
The first or rudest, assimilate nearly to
those yet used by the rudest tribes in the
north or in Brazil, Antilles, &amp;c., indicating
a similar barbarous state.
</p>

<p>
The second or primitive, is known by
using wood and earth instead of stones for
buildings.
</p>

<p>
The third or most refined, employed
stones, often well cut as in Mexico, Central
America, Peru, &amp;c., and indicates arts
nearly equal to those of Egypt and India.
</p>

<p>
Besides such great monumental remains;
there are lesser antiquities; fragments of
sculpture, statues, idols, painting, Mosaic,
&amp;c., either in metals, stones, pottery, beads,
&amp;c., found every where mixed with the
others.
</p>

<p>
But the most singular and dubious relics
of antiquity, are subteraneous or in excavations:
these are in caves, mines, pits, &amp;c.:
while under ground are found trees, stumps,
charcoal, ashes, shells, pavements, walls,
houses, &amp;c. that must have been buried by
alluvions, diluvions or new formed soil. It
has been surmised or ascertained that some
may be antidiluvian: although those in
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
deep alluvial soils, near streams, and connected
with graves, may have been buried
by men, or fluvial inundations. Mummies,
skeletons and bones, with human apparel
and implements have been found in caves,
evidently buried there by human means,
and not by floods. Human remains are but
seldom if ever connected with the organic
remains of the soil and caves, even of the
latest geological date.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Geography, Maps, &amp;c.</hi> The knowledge
of the regions and localities inhabited
by mankind, or where colonies are sent,
empires founded, is needful to history, in
order to understand and treat the events
and migrations. The physical configuration
of the land, the climates, plains, mountains
and streams, have a great influence
on civilization and communications. Physical
geography is constant and invariable:
while civil or ethnographical geography is
constantly fluctuating in limits and names.
</p>

<p>
If we had complete series of maps by
chronological order upon America; we
should find therein the materials for a comparative
historical geography, and successive
ethnography, showing the gradual revolutions
of mankind. The old maps of
America, those of Laet, the old geographers
&amp;c. are very valuable for this object.
Many travellers in America, have given
original maps, which furnish similar materials.
I have chiefly used for Peru and
Austral America, the maps of Laet, Acarete,
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
D'Anville, Molina, Falkner, Cochrane,
Wedel, the Jesuits, &amp;c. Among the modern
general maps, relating to South America,
the Spanish maps of 1810 and 1822, the
English of 1815, the French of 1830, the
latest American of Tanner, &amp;c. By those
materials I have been able to trace and fix
four periods of American geography, 2 ancient
and 2 modern.
</p>

<p>
I. Primitive geography of America.
</p>

<p>
II. Ancient ditto, or between 1400 and
1500.
</p>

<p>
III. Modern colonial geography.
</p>

<p>
IV. Modern independent geography.
</p>

<p>
I have formed Mpt. maps of the two
first periods, which shall be published gradually,
or in my Illustrations of the Ancient
Geography of America. We have thousands
of maps on the early geography of
the Eastern Hemisphere, and no one as yet
on the Western Hemisphere! to show the
respective limits and positions of Ancient
Empires, Nations, Cities, &amp;c., except Clavigero's
map of Anahuac at the Spanish
conquest, those of Hayti, Laet, &amp;.c.
</p>

<p>
We have the plans of Ancient Mexico
and Cuzco; but lack those of Tiahuanaco,
Otolum, and many more important for ancient
history. Several plans of ancient
sites of civilization have been given, along
with those of monuments. I have many
in Mpt. yet unpublished. The greatest
part of modern cities, are built on ancient
sites, from Mexico to Chili. In North
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
America, the same happens with Cincinnati,
Louisville, Pittsburg, St. Louis, Philadelphia,
Savannah, &amp;c. The views of ruined
cities, and those of actual cities, are partly
historical, connected with the knowledge
of gradual American civilization.
</p>

<p>
Many ancient names of islands, lakes,
streams and mountains, are preserved in
actual names. Such are Cuba, Hayti&mdash;Ontario,
Erie, Titicaca&mdash;Ohio, Alatamaha,
Maranon, Parana, Rivers.&mdash;Alleghanies,
Andes, Parima, Mountains, &amp;c. When
the names have been changed, it is the duty
of the historical geographer to compare
the old and new names.
</p>

<p>
The Mexicans and other civilized ancient
nations, could draw and paint maps. Even
our North American tribes can draw rude
maps on skins or bark. Some of these are
preserved in museums; but none have ever
been published: although some are pretty
correct and deserving it.
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>Natural Sciences.</hi> They are now
becoming sisters of history. Geology is
connected with geography. Botany and
Zoology, acquaint us with trees, plants and
animals, which were used in the arts and
agriculture at different periods. The Asiatic
origin of maize, called <foreign rend='italic'>maza</foreign> by Hesiod
and known to the Pelagians (Hughes
Greece,) has been unperceived by Humboldt
and many others, although it throws
some light on the early migrations and
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
communications of tribes. Maize was cultivated
in Assyria, West Tartary, North
Africa and Java, before 1492, as asserted
by Marco Polo, Crawford, Raffles. Gebelin,
&amp;c.<note place='foot'>In Hughes' Travels in Sicily, Greece
and Albania in 1813-14, published 1820,
we find this fact about Hesiod's mention of
maize, used by the poor in mush and cakes
by the early Greeks: the modern Greeks
call it <foreign rend='italic'>Arabo-sité</foreign>, Arabic corn, in Italy it
is called <foreign rend='italic'>Grano-turco</foreign>, or Turkish-corn:
having reached Greece and Italy through
the Arabs, and not from America. It has
been cultivated in Java, Central Africa,
Soudan, &amp;c. from time immemorial, having
native names in the Negro languages. Gebelin
thinks it was known in Assyria. Polo
found it in Tartary in the 13th century.
Frazer lately saw it almost wild in the
Imalaya mts.: it has never been found
quite wild in America.</note>
</p>

<p>
America had anciently several cereal
plants, besides maize, two kinds of indigenous
wheat and barley in Chili. The
Quinoa and Zizania, the rice of South and
North America. Many roots, beans, seeds,
fruits and flowers, were cultivated from
Canada to Chili. Native dies were abundant,
the indigo and annato were natives.
Red and yellow cochineal were nursed and
collected. Many peculiar kinds of cotton,
silks, hemp, flax, agave, palm, &amp;c., were
cultivated or collected to use for cloths,
threads, ropes, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Paleontology, a new science, seeks for
the remains of animals dwelling on earth,
before mankind. America has already
afforded the huge mastodons, elephants,
megatherium, megalonyx, as primitive land
animals, and many large reptiles, crocodiles
of streams and lakes.
</p>

<p>
American Zoology is very peculiar: a
few arctic quadrupeds, birds and insects excepted;
all the animals of this hemisphere
are peculiar to it. Reptiles almost entirely
such, even in the North. All the American
monkeys form distinct species. The tropical
animals of the two hemispheres are
distinct, even often in genera. Out of 33
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
quadrupeds formerly domesticated in America,
the dog only may be deemed a stranger:
and it had even many American varieties.
</p>

<p>
The domestic quadrupeds of ancient
America were 33, while only 25 in Asia,
Africa and Europe. Among them were 4
species of Vicunia, 4 of Agutis, 2 deer,
2 hogs, 10 monkeys, &amp;c. See my dissertation
on the domestic animals of both hemispheres,
1832. Americans had also tamed
22 birds or fowls, as many as Asia, &amp;c., and
even some reptiles, fishes, insects, &amp;c., had
become domestic: altogether 112 in America
and only 80 in Europe, Asia, &amp;c., before
1492.
</p>

<p>
American botany offers many peculiar
regions; in the North only, akin to Asiatic
or European botany; but becoming quite
distinct in the tropics, still more so in Austral
America. Since 1492 the European
colonists have brought many plants, that
are become spontaneous from Canada to
Chili: these must be carefully separated
from the ancient indigenous plants.
</p>

<p>
The American Floras are nearly as many
as the 15 natural regions already indicated,
each having a focal seat or cradle in some
range of mountains. They become richer
or more abundant in species within the
tropics, decreasing to the North and South.
Trees and palm abound there, and disappear
near the poles, the palms are unknown
beyond the 36 degrees North and South.
The equator has 500 species of trees; in
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
latitude 40 N. and S. only 100 kinds are
found, or even less. Social plants and
grasses abound in plains, and in the North
dwindle to mosses and lichens.
</p>

<p>
Trees were early tools of civilization,
affording timber, fuel, dies, houses, boats,
weapons, &amp;c. Fruit trees afforded food in
abundance: even the tribes of North America
near latitude 40 d. had 40 kinds of native
wild fruits, and had begun to plant
orchards of plumtrees, peachtrees, crab-trees,
nut-trees. They knew how to make
oils of nuts, to dry the fruits, make sugars
out of maples and other trees.
</p>

<p>
Fish has always afforded an ample supply
of food to early nations, whence the
preference to dwell near streams, Lakes
and shores. Notwithstanding the swimming
rambles of fishes, it is only the pelagic or
oceanic tribes of them that are common to
both hemispheres. Most of the resident
shore fishes of America are peculiar species.
Still more so with lacustral and fluviatile
fishes. These are divided into peculiar
regions. Our northern lakes form one; and
almost every large stream has a peculiar
generation of finny tribes: such are the
Mississippi, Maranon, Parana, the Atlantic
streams and rivers, those of Brazil, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Minerals abound in both Americas. It
was gold and silver that drew hither the
greedy Spanish freebooters. The civilized
nations knew mining, smelting, casting and
forging. They used gold, silver, copper,
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
brass, lead, &amp;c.; collected and prized gems,
emeralds, agats, volcanic glass, &amp;c. Even
the less civilized tribes of North America
used copper and lead, clays for pipes, pottery,
&amp;c. Iron was scarce because so hard
to melt, and highly prized; but iron-rings
have been found as jewels around the wrists
of skeletons.
</p>

<p>
Metallic coins were little known except
in Central America; but bits of silver, gold,
tin, iron, were used as such. The other
mediums of exchange were skins, mats,
nuts, cacao, shells, beads, mosaic works,
&amp;c. Commerce was well known to many
nations; traders went 500 miles to exchange
commodities in Florida, Mexico, Yucatan,
Peru, &amp;c. Navigators went by sea for the
same purpose all over the Antilles, coast
of Peru, and in the great streams. It is
thus that were found many strange and
foreign objects, jewels, medals, metals, &amp;c.,
all over America, and in early tombs.
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>Ethnography.</hi> This new science
which undertakes to describe nations,
reckons already many peculiar branches.
Anthropography or the knowledge of physical
mankind. Philology or the comparative
study of human speech and languages.
Besides the nameless branch attending to
the moral ideas, arts, institutions, manners,
civilization, governments and religions of
mankind; which might be called moral
ethnography.
</p>

<p>
All these studies become the philosophy
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
of history, and shall duly command my
attention. Some writers neglect them
altogether; others, like Robertson, do not
know how to collect and accumulate facts
instead of systems: Rollin has shown in
his Ancient History, how useful moral
ethnography may be as an auxiliary: although
he omitted philology and physical
facts.
</p>

<p>
I have studied the men of all the parts
of the world, in order to know and compare
them, better than had been done.
All the errors on the histories of nations,
proceed commonly from the slender or
partial views acquired or admitted by the
writers. There is much to glean on the
ethnography of modern nations, and therefrom
we may ascend to ancient ethnography.
It would be needful to study well the
physical and moral features of all; the
shapes of bodies, skulls, faces and limbs;
the complexions of the skin, hairs and eyes;
with the casual or permanent varieties.
</p>

<p>
But, above all, we must better study all
the spoken languages and dialects. It is
strange that we hardly know anything, and
sometimes nothing at all, on the languages
of many existing tribes, with whom we have
intercourse in both Americas. It would
be desirable to procure at least a vocabulary
of 100 essential words, in each. Such
words, including the cardinal numbers, will
soon become the key of ethnographical
philology. While the additional study of
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
phonology or sounds of languages, their
idioms and grammars, their roots, and
verbs, the alphabets, glyphs and symbols
used to communicate ideas, will combine
to furnish the complete knowledge of philology
as a separate science. Although
I have not always carried so far my researches;
I did so for a few, applying
chiefly myself to the essential features of
languages; and the unexpected results will
be surprising.
</p>

<p>
American anthropography will teach
that there were men of all sizes, features
and complexions, in this hemisphere before
1492: notwithstanding the false assertions
of many writers, who take one nation
for the whole American group. The
Uskihs, the Puruays, the Parias, the Chons,
&amp;c. were as white as the Spaniards, 50
such tribes were found in South America;
while many tribes of Choco, the Manabis,
the Yaruras, &amp;c., were as black as negroes.
All the other shades of brown, tawny and
coppery, were scattered every where.
There was not a single red man in America,
unless painted such. Some tribes
had scanty beards as the Tartars, Chinese,
Berbers, &amp;c., others bushy beards.
The Tinguis or Patagons were 7 or 8 feet
high, and the Guaymas only 4 or 5 feet.
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='italic'>Traditions and Annals.</hi> Many
American nations preserve a memory of
historical events by unwritten traditions,
repeated from fathers to sons; or communicated
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
orally by the priests, chiefs or
elderly men. Many are preserved yet to
this day, by frequent repetitions, being
embodied in songs, hymns, maxims, tales,
drawings, or even symbolic figures and
signs. Many of those traditions are precious
for history, notwithstanding the fables,
allegories, metaphors, personifications,
&amp;c., which partly conceal them or render
the meaning obscure. We must learn to
decipher them as we do old inscriptions
and medals.
</p>

<p>
Although many such are now nearly lost
for us, by the extinction of the living books,
who kept the remembrance: there are
many already collected, and of which we
ought to make a good use. But there are
as many more, which have never been
collected nor printed. I have collected
many such in North America in manuscript.
It often happens that the American
tribes will not communicate them to their
foes or oppressors; but their friends and
allies may hope to receive the deposit of
them. Every enlightened traveller ought
to seek for them wherever he goes. Yet
after being acquired, they are sometimes
lost again, by neglect. I have known some
learned and unlearned men despise them
equally as <hi rend='italic'>Indian Stories</hi>, because they
despise the ancient American race. There
are, however, as yet many historical songs,
poems and tales to collect among all the
American tribes, which falling in good
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
hands cannot fail to attract notice and be
employed usefully. Every one who neglects
or destroys them acts as a vandal.
Malcolm has said at the outset of his history
of Persia, that we ought never to
neglect the original notions of a people on
its origin, or early history, since therein is
found the germ and spring of their subsequent
conduct, actions and opinions.
</p>

<p>
My illustrations shall contain many unpublished
or forgotten traditions, whereof
I shall avail myself in all my historical
annals and researches. I consider those
of the Uskihs, Dinnis, Ongwis, Linapis,
Shawanis, Cados, Natchez, Ozages, Atakapas,
Apalachians, &amp;c., as highly important
for the annals of North America. The
same may be said of the Mexicans, Zapotecas,
Mayas, Toltecas, Chols, &amp;c., for
Central America. Of the Haytians, Cubans
and Caribs for the Antilles. And in
South America those of the Muyzcas,
Cumanans, Tamanacs, Popayans, Peruvians,
Chilians, Brazilians, Abipons, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
7. <hi rend='italic'>Chronology and Astronomy.</hi> These
two sciences always go together, and form
a double key of history. The American
chronology is by no means fixed before
1492, and requires a skillful hand to preserve
and compare all the heterogenous
dates heretofore collected. I shall attempt
to elucidate it gradually; but may often be
compelled, as in geology, to relate only
successive events without dates, and merely
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
referred to a series of gradual facts. In
Austral America, we are told that none
had notions of astronomy and dates, except
the Chilians; yet their chronology begins only
in 1450. I doubt this: I rather believe
that their oral traditions have been
neglected, as well as those of their neighbours.
</p>

<p>
In Peru, there are many positive dates,
yet I was the first to reduce them to chronological
order. In Brazil and Guyana,
but few dates are found. The Muyzcas
had very early dates, yet few have been
preserved; much obscured by personifications
of dynasties, and Pietrahita begins
their real annals only in 1490, or 45 years
before the Spanish invasion. In the Antilles
the dates are quite loose, and difficult to
reduce even to a serial order.
</p>

<p>
But in Central and Mexican America,
we find many early dates with a regular
chronology. Yet some are extravagant or
contradictory. I shall endeavour to elucidate
them, so as to reduce the whole to
order. They must form the base of a
regular American chronology, that ascends
by dates to the flood and creation. In
Yucatan the first regular date only reach
to 940 after Christ.
</p>

<p>
In North America, where the smallest
number of dates existed; we have unexpectedly
and quite lately, found that many
ancient dates could be procured. Cusick
has published those of the Ongwi traditions,
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
and I have ascertained those of the Linapis.
Both of which reach to the flood and
creation, and afford series of available
dates as early as 1600 years before our
era; thus nearly as ample as those of the
TOL-tecas, and as plain in some instances.
</p>

<p>
Astronomy was cultivated by all the civilized
nations of ancient America. They
had cycles of 144, 104, 60, 52, 20, 15 and
13 solar years. Humboldt has well written
on that subject; but much remains to
be gleaned. The northern tribes reckon
by generations as the Greeks, the Polynesians,
&amp;c., and by winters instead of years,
moons instead of solar months. They had
also a cycle of 60 years. In Central America,
&amp;c. the months were of 20 days,
including 4 weeks of 5 days. But the Peruvians
had months of 27 days, or 3 weeks
of 9 days as the Etruscans. The Muyzcas
small weeks of 3 days, &amp;c. No where in
ancient America, was found the sabatical
week of days, based on the 7 planets and
the 4 quarters of a lunation. This is remarkable,
as evincing a remote antiquity,
and separation before this week was adopted
in Egypt, India, Syria, Celtica, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Until 120 years before Christ the TOL-tecas
reckoned only 365 days in the solar
year, as the primitive nations of Asia: then
they added the hours to the year. This
forms their astronomical era. The Muyzcas
had a very complicated astronomy, and
three kinds of years. The usual was of 20
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
moons, and the ecclesiastical of 37 moons.
The horal division unknown in many parts of
America, was of 4 hours in the day for the
Muyzcas and Mexicans, elsewhere of 5, 10
and 20. The 24 hours and the Zodiac of
12 signs with 360 degrees were not known.
The Mexican Zodiac had 13 signs and
104 degrees.
</p>

<p>
Arithmetic is intimately connected with
astronomy. A complete decimal numeration
was known to all the civilized American
nations, and even to the northern tribes.
The most rude tribes reckoned by 5 or the
manual mode; there are traces also of a
binary numeration, the most simple of all:
while others had complex calculations by
13 and by 20 or scores. We find no trace
of any by 7, and but slight indications of a
ternary numeration by 3 and 9. All these
American modes of reckoning may thus be
reduced to the <emph>binary</emph>, by two or pairs;
and the quinary or manual by the five fingers,
of which the decimal is the double,
and by 20 the quadruple.
</p>

<p>
8. <hi rend='italic'>Languages.</hi> They are becoming one
of the most important aids in history. When
the annals are ample and clear, the examination
of the languages is merely a supplement
to historical knowledge; but when
they are obscure, mutilated or totally lost;
languages then supply more or less to their
defects or loss. Their comparative study
furnish us new lights to ascertain the origines,
parentage, dispersions, colonies, alliances,
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
wars, &amp;c., of the nations thus deprived
of written annals or even traditions.
They serve also to rectify the imperfect
annals or the fabulous traditions. This
study may lead besides to trace the manners,
religions, intercourse, arts and sciences
of nearly all nations; since the proper
languages of each people offers a picture
of the civilization, acquired or borrowed
knowledge, modes of life, &amp;c. of each.
</p>

<p>
It is above all in both Americas that this
study is indispensable in historical researches:
I will therefore apply to languages
in all cases, and make constant use of them;
and they will unfold new facts quite unknown,
although very important, Historical
lights shall thereby be thrown on many
obscure subjects, whence astonishing and
unexpected results may spring, in which I
shall depend as much as upon mutilated and
neglectful traditions.
</p>

<p>
By taking into view all the American
languages or as many as are already known,
we shall easily dispel the errors and absurd
systems of philosophers and philologists,
who taking only a few as samples of the
whole, have either deemed <emph>all the Americans</emph>,
as many Jews, or Tartars, or Atlantes,
or sprung from the ground, and so on.
Now the fact is that these writers have never
taken the trouble to compare the numerous
American languages and dialects, reduce
them to groups, and seek their affinities
elsewhere.
</p>

<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>

<p>
Adelung and Vater had once stated without
proof, that nearly 1200 languages existed
in America. Balbi has reduced them
to 423, of which 212 in South America;
but they can be much further reduced, most
of them being mere dialects. The whole
may be comprised in 25 groups of languages,
or even less; which were certainly
identic in 25 languages 2 or 3000 years ago:
and all of which have astonishing affinities
with the groups of the eastern hemisphere,
so as to indicate a parentage 4 or 5000
years ago.
</p>

<p>
Vater and Maltebrun have given a few
hundred examples of such analogies: and
the systematic writers have supposed that
they had exhausted the comparisons. Yet
a single language, the Chilian, has by itself
more affinities with the languages of Europe,
than all those mentioned by Vater and
others, put together! The foreign or transatlantic
affinities of American languages,
vary from 10 to 70 per cent, according to
the nations. If we suppose that there are
400 languages in America, and as many in
the eastern hemisphere, and each to have
about 2000 roots or essential words only;
while the mean affinities are only 25 per
cent: we shall find as many as 200,000
affinities! out of America, in every American
language; and in all the 400, as many
as 80 millions! instead of the paltry reckoning
of 1000 or so. All this is susceptible
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
of mathematical proofs, and shall be
unfolded gradually in these pages.
</p>

<p>
The theory about the common exclusive
grammatical structure of all the American
languages, is equally erroneous and based
upon partial facts. Instead of all the
American languages being polysynthetic by
amalgamating words, we find in America
many mixt forms, and even the pure monosylabic:
while the amalgamation of words
prevails more or less in Europe and Africa;
chiefly in the Bask, Italian dialects, Greek,
Berber and other Atlantic dialects, the
Negro languages, those of Caffraria, the
Sanscrit and all the derived languages.
</p>

<p>
It had been asserted that no American
language was monosylabic: yet Balbi states
that the Guarani and Maya are such; Nasera
has lately proved the same of the
Othomi. Thus we have at least 3 such
American groups of languages. But there
are more; nay many American languages
have monosylabic roots, even among the
most amalgamated groups.
</p>

<p>
The most obvious grammatical classification
of American languages, has escaped
the acuteness of philologists. I find it in the
epithetic structure, or relative position of
ideas. Under this view all the languages
arrange themselves in three great classes
or groups. 1. Regular, 2. Resupinate,
3. Mixt.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>The Regular</hi> is the most simple and
natural form: where the roots or nouns are
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
prefixed, and the adjuncts or adjectives,
expressing epithetes or qualities follow or
are added. This group includes in the
Eastern Continent 1. All the Semetic languages,
Arabic, Hebrew, &amp;c. 2. All the
Atlantic and Egyptian languages. 3. All
the Celtic and Cantabrian languages. 4.
All the Polynesian and Malay languages.
5. The Bhotiya and many languages of
Thibet. 6. Most of the Negro languages.
7. Yakut of Siberia, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
In America this group includes my groups
1. Innuit or Uski. 2. Ongwi. 3. Capaha.
4. Chactah. 5. All the languages related
thereto in North-west America, the Kaluchi,
Mandan, &amp;c. 6. All the Guarani
languages of South America, and perhaps
many others, Mayna, Mobima, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>The Resupinate or Reflexed Group</hi>:
where the roots or nouns substantive are
reversed, following the adjective or epithetes,
which are prefixed. This second
mode of uniting ideas prevails 1. In all the
languages of China and Tartary. 2. In
all the Teutonic languages German, Swede,
English. 3. In most of the Thracian, Illyrian,
Greek and Slavonic languages. 4.
In all the Turkish languages of Turan,
Bokhara, Turkey. 5. The Newari of Imalaya.
6. The Qua or Hottentot of South
Africa.
</p>

<p>
In America, it is the most prevailing form,
found in my groups 1. Linni or Linapis.
2. Otali or Cheroki. 3. In all the Mexican
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
and Othomi languages. 4. Chontal.
5. Skereh or Pani and Shoshoni, of North
America,&mdash;and in South America. 6. Chili.
7. Yarura. 8. Mbaya and probably many
more: although hardly indicated by the
philologists.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Mixt Form</hi>, which employs or adopts
more or less the two former modes; although
there is always a prevailing form, that indicates
the original mode of uniting ideas.
This mixt form appears 1. In the Sanscrit
and all derived languages. 2. In the Zend
and Persian languages of Iran. 3. In the
Pelagic and Italic languages, the Latin,
Italian, French, Spanish, Greek. 4. The
Japanese, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
While in America it is found 1. In the
Aruac languages. 2. The Muyzca. 3. The
Peruvian languages, &amp;c. of South America,
and in North America. 4. The Atalan.
5. Mizteca. 6. Opata, and probably some
others.
</p>

<p>
This comparative classification of languages,
will greatly help future investigations.
It will show the improbability of the
two opposite modes of annexing ideas having
been entertained, by the same people at
any time; while the mixt form evinces amalgamations
of ancient nations. We have
thus acquired another clue to trace primitive
connections, another available mean
to pursue the human steps on earth.
</p>

<p>
9. <hi rend='italic'>Religions and Mythologies.</hi> The
human opinions on the past and future form
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
every where ample themes of thoughts and
actions. From revelations, inspirations,
oracles, wisdom and priestcraft comingled,
have arisen all the worships, and rites, dogmas
and creeds, swaying the human mind,
through hope or fear, love or hatred. The
history of religious ideas, is in fact the history
of civilization, since they have sprung
together in social men. Nearly all the religions
of Asia (which from hence have
spread throughout the earth along with
mankind) were found in America: except
the modern creeds. But the traces of Judaism
and Budhism were very faint and
local. Mahometism was unknown, Braminism
hardly known. Christianity or some
of its rites are traced to Yucatan only, and
may arise from other sources. The most
prevailing worships were the primitive Sabeism,
Solar worship, Polytheism, Dualism
or Manicheism, Shamanism or worship of
Spirits, Idolatry, and Fetichism or animal
worship. We find throughout America
many modifications of these creeds: with
several complex mythologies, more or less
analogous to eastern dogmas.
</p>

<p>
The investigation of these American religions
affords not only an insight into the
ancient civilization, but many proofs of ancient
communications with Asia or Africa.
Throughout North America the Dualism,
mythologies and fabulous traditions point to
a connexion with Tartary. In Florida,
Mexico and Yucatan, begin to appear the
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
Solar worship, and a cruel idolatry foreign
to it. This Solar worship appears in a
purer form in North America, as far as Peru.
While in the Antilles, Guyana, Brazil and
Chili, prevailed several worships of heavenly
and terrestial spirits; somewhat akin to
the primitive idolatry of Africa, Europe,
Iran, India, China and Polynesia.
</p>

<p>
American religions admitted, like many
others, of Priests, oracles, temples, shrines,
pilgrimages, holy places, sacrifices, expiations,
confessions, offerings, hymns, veneration
for animals, men and stars. Idols
painted or sculptured in wood, pottery,
stone, metals, &amp;c.; bloody rites by human
sacrifices, scarifications, circumscision, &amp;c.
But none of these practices were general,
some were quite local and circumscribed.
Thus circumscision was only used by the
Mayas of Yucatan, the Calchaquis of Tucuman,
&amp;c. Traces of a triple god or
Indian Trimurti have been met from Ohio
to Peru; but it was no where the prevailing
religion. As the same idea was found
among the Celts and Polynesians, it may
have come by the east rather than Polynesia
in the west.
</p>

<p>
10. <hi rend='italic'>Civilization and Manners.</hi> This
completes the history of all nations. When
their annals are well known, it becomes a
very proper appendix to them; when they
are not, it is a very needful supplement to
the traditions, &amp;c. But we must not make
any history consist merely in such an account,
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
as often done by negligent writers.
The manners and customs of every people,
are so fluctuating, liable to be changed, or
improved by civilization, imitation, arts and
sciences, &amp;c.; that they cannot afford any
test of connections. They are often borrowed,
from neighbors or strangers, disused
after awhile by whims or wars, invented to
suit the climate and productions it may
afford. We have positive proofs that the
Europeans have since 1492 greatly modified
the customs of all the tribes they conquered
or visited. This must have happened formerly
also, by other visits or communications.
Yet, notwithstanding the uncertainty
of the origin and duration of the primitive
American customs, they must be studied,
as one of the sources and objects of history.
</p>

<p>
We find, in ancient America, nearly all
the forms of social civilization and manners
of the east. But the Nomadic life with
camels, oxen and sheep, was unknown, as
well as those animals. The American
cattle or lamas, &amp;c. of South America,
hogs of Coriana, dogs and rabbits of
Mexico, deers of Florida, buffalos of Taos,
were kept by sedentary civilized tribes.
The Nomadic wandering tribes of America
were chiefly hunters and fishermen: scattered
around the agricultural nations,
spreading from Canada to Chili.
</p>

<p>
All the kinds of governments were known
in America: Theocracy, despotism, monarchy,
oligarchy, and democracy. But
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
the most prevailing were theocracy among
the civilized nations, oligarchy among the
barbarous nations: with two peculiar modifications,
of double kings as among Arabs,
civil and military; and chiefs of families
or tribes, as among all primitive nations.
Queens were known to but few tribes, although
the female line was often hereditary.
Written laws and codes were known to the
Tol-tecas, Mexicans, Mayans, Muyzcas,
Panos, Peruvians, &amp;c. Oral laws were
elsewhere preserved by priests or magistrates.
</p>

<p>
Polygamy prevailed among some tribes
or castes, but was not universal. The 4
castes of Indians are distinctly found in
nearly all the civilized nations, often modified
into priests, nobles, vassals and slaves.
The arts of music, medicine, smithery,
painting, sculpture, architecture, agriculture,
pottery, &amp;c., were well known to
nearly all. The sciences of geometry,
geography, botany, astronomy, &amp;c., were
cultivated from Mexico to Peru, even
taught in schools and colleges; with the
arts, the laws, the rites, and history of the
country.
</p>

<p>
Marsden has well distinguished several
degrees of civilization in Asia. If no American
nation had reached the Greeks and
Romans, or our modern polished and improved
civilization; it is not extraordinary.
But the Peruvians, Muyzcas, Tol-tecas,
Mexicans, Talascas, &amp;c., were nearly
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
equal to the Chinese, Egyptians and Hindus
in civilization; not far removed from
the European civilization of the 15th century:
nay, in some things superior. The
second degree of American civilization
found in Chili, Florida, Cumana, the Antilles,
Popayan, the Linapis, Omaguas &amp;c.
was equal to that of the Arabs, Malays,
Celts, Cantabrians, Pelagians, &amp;c. While
the third degree found in all the barbarous
nations, Innuit or Esquimaux, Shoshonis,
Caribs, Brazilians, &amp;c. was not worse
than what we find among the Fins, Laplanders,
Tartars, Sames, Negroes and
Hottentots.
</p>

<p>
Individual property in land was almost
unknown in America; but feodal and tribal
property well understood. Common property
of tribes and villages over their territories,
was the most usual tenure, modified
by wars, conquests, tributes. Individual
property existed only for tenements and
personal property. Warfares, marriages
and funerals were very different in every
nation. The weapons of war were clubs,
arrows, darts, lances, axes, Macana swords,
Sarbacanes or blowing tubes, slings, nooses,
thronged balls, &amp;c. as elsewhere. There
was a peculiar diplomacy, with heralds,
envoys, messengers. Shields, towers, forts,
walls, ditches, were used for defence, besides
<foreign rend='italic'>Estopils</foreign> a peculiar quilted armor.
Flags, banners, and standards were known.
The calumets, leaves or green feathers,
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
council fires, and white flags were emblems
of peace. Alliances and confederations
existed from earliest times, also the adoption
of tribes and prisoners. Slavery was
hardly known; but vassalage much extended
over conquered tribes.
</p>

<p>
Dresses and ornaments were quite various.
Seal skins used by the Innuit.
Deer skins and furs by the tribes of North
America. In tropical America many
tribes went nearly naked, with a mere
apron or pagne of cotton or grass cloth.
But the civilized nations were decently
clothed with cotton shirts and feather mantles.
The <foreign rend='italic'>Poncho</foreign> is a true American
dress known from Mexico to Chili, hardly
known out of America except Polynesia.<note place='foot'>The
<foreign rend='italic'>Poncho</foreign> is a long strip of cloth,
with a hole in the middle for the head, the
ends hanging before and behind, often fastened
on the sides. It was used by the
ancient Mexicans, the Muyzcas, Peruvians
and Chilians. It has been adopted as quite
convenient by the Spanish colonists, and
is very becoming when ornamented.</note>
</p>

<p>
Women wore long pagnes or gowns.
They made cloths of lama wool in Peru;
of cotton, hemp, nettles, grass, feathers &amp;c.
there and elsewhere; either twisted, plaited
or woven. The Peruvians and Chilians
had a peculiar loom and plough. Cotton
looms were used in Florida, Mexico, and
all over South America, even by the Caribs
to make hamacs or hanging beds.
Among some nations women had the most
labor to perform; yet even the men assumed
hunting, making canoes, huts, weapons,
&amp;c. More civilized tribes worked
together in the fields: The proud and warlike
employed vassals or slaves.
</p>

<p>
Painting the body or face, was usual
among many nations, but not general. It
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
was useful against heat and flies, or was
used to inspire love or terror. Ornaments
to the head, ears, nose, lips, wrists, legs,
&amp;c., were more or less adopted by men
and women. The hair was usually worn
long; but many tribes cut it in various
ways, as a crown or tuft. The beard even
when scanty was deemed unbecoming by
many tribes, and totally eradicated; but
some tribes wore beards. The head was
often left uncovered; but hats were worn
in the N. W. and Central America, turbans
in Paria and Florida, feather crowns
in the tropics, <foreign rend='italic'>Lautas</foreign> or diadem-bands in
Peru and the Andes. Shoes and gloves
were unknown; but sandals, leggings, leather
clods, and mocassins or slippers of
various substances, commonly used; with
singular snow shoes of bark in winter by
northern tribes.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>American Cataclysms</hi> <hi rend='italic'>or Considerations
on the Periods of American Geogony,
Ontogony, Floods, and ancient
population &amp;c. of both Americas.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
History does not merely consist in accumulating
facts: these constitute the annals
of empires; but the real philosophical history
has a nobler aim. It seeks results,
teaches lessons of wisdom, brands with infamy
the foes of mankind, and inspires
veneration for the benefactors of the human
race. It presents examples worthy to be
followed, and records the crimes to be
avoided.
</p>

<p>
The several departments of history that
are distinguished as biography, civil and
ecclesiastical annals, moral and physical
surveys of mankind, comparative philology,
archeology, chronology, mythology, &amp;c.
All combine to instruct and amuse, to record
the past and present, and to lead to better
future actions, an improved social order.
The nations often forget the wise lessons of
time and experience; but they are continually
recalled to memory and view by the
historians, who seek the truth, and setting
aside the sway of human passions or national
prejudices, present the faithful mirror
of history to the eyes of posterity.
</p>

<p>
Such is my aim. American history has
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
been so much despised or perverted, that
few lessons, have been drawn from it: yet
it affords ample scope for reflection, study
and admiration. Nearly one half of the
habitable globe, during all the past ages,
cannot fail to offer a variety of subjects, to
draw the attention of philosophy, wisdom
and philanthropy: that mutual benevolence
of mankind, which ought ever to be
felt; but is so often discarded or forgotten
through the contrary tendencies of pride,
lust, cupidity, and all the baneful passions.
</p>

<p>
The connections of historical facts with
all the sciences, afford another useful theme;
that may vastly increase our comparative
knowledge: much of it has arisen, besides
observation, from accurate comparison,
analysis and generalization, which combine
to give results, enlarging the field and
sphere of human knowledge, in all its
branches.
</p>

<p>
If we go back, by the help of geology, to
the most remote periods of existence and
life in this hemisphere, we find it like the
remainder of the globe, immersed under
the Ocean. There, in the depths of the
briny waves, the actual rocks now supporting
the dry soil, were formed and matured:
superposed and intermingled by aquatic and
volcanic phenomena and cataclysms, if not
by superadded aerial depositions. Then
were formed the primitive strata of America,
ere life had begun to vivify the waters;
then were cast the Porphyries, Granites,
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
Shales, Basalts, and other primitive or volcanic
rocks, that are now chiefly found in
Boreal and Western America, the Andes,
Mts. Parima, and Brazil, the Austral and
Boreal Islands, Hayti and the Antilles.
This was the first period of terrestial Creation.
</p>

<p>
After this period of unknown length, began
the epocha of aquatic life; when the
breath of GOD, moving on the waters, gave
life and motion to organized aquatic beings;
1. Plants and Fucites, 2. Spongites and Alcyonites,
3. Polyps and corals, 4. Worms
and radials, 5. Sluggs and shells, 6. Mollusca
and Cephalopodes, 7. Trilobites and
Crustacites.... All incipient vegetating
beings, or inferior unbony animals, gradually
evolved and born in the waters of the
Sea.... Followed by the more perfect
vertebrated aquatic animals, 8. Fishes and
Sharks, 9. Snakes and reptiles; lastly, 10.
Seals and whales. Some of which require
shallow water, to dwell and breed.... This
was the second period of American Creation:
<hi rend='italic'>Aquatic life</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The third epocha is that of the destruction
of aquatic life, by cataclysms and depositions,
submarine volcanic cavernous
eruptions or other causes, throwing suddenly
in a soft, sandy or muddy state, the substances
that have formed the secondary
mountains or strata of psamites, argillites,
calcarites, carbonites, &amp;c., that overwhelmed
the aquatic tribes in their way;
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
which becoming therein entombed as living
medals of this globe, declare to us these
mighty successive cataclysms or floods of
sand, clay, lime and coal; now met in vast
regions, the Alleghanies and Central North
America, Florida and the Bahama Islands;
the hills and plains of Brazil, Chili, East
Peru, and Central Maragnon.... This
was the second period of terrestrial formation
in America, the third of successive
eventful periods.
</p>

<p>
The fourth must have been the rise of
the land above the waters, if not already
partly begun. The epocha of terrestrial
upheaving and distortion of strata, by an
awful inward force; either volcanic, or calorific,
or of growing crystalization; forming
mountains and islands, raising them
above the Ocean; to become the nucleus
of future Continents. The American hemisphere
had then probably two great islands,
in the North and South, with many smaller
islands between them, in the tropical sea:
the Alleghany and Atlantis forming two
others in the east, and many others studding
the two polar regions. The insulated
mountain tract between Lake Nicaragua
and the long valley of Choco, must then
have formed another Island of the Antilles.
Guyana or Parima was also another large
island: while Brazil was a vast peninsula
attached to the Andes. I have endeavored
to express this first configuration of
America in my two maps of North and
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
South America; when the Ocean was yet
about 500 feet higher than it is actually.
Whether this cataclysm was contemporaneous
throughout, or by successive throes
must be ascertained by Geogony.... This
was the fourth period of terrestrial events
in this hemisphere; but the first of terrestrial
separate existence.
</p>

<p>
When the dry land had appeared, the
creative power of <hi rend='smallcaps'>God</hi> exerted upon the
virgin mould of the mountains, drew forth
into life, Plants and Flowers, Trees and
Palms; with the successive terrestrial animals,
1. Worms and Slugs, 2. Insects and
Spiders, 3. Snakes and Reptiles, 4. Birds
and Fowls, 5. Beasts and Bats. Streams
began to flow, valleys were excavated in
the soft or yielding strata by heavy tides
and powerful streams: then the fishes of
the sea ascended the rivers, and filled the
streams and lakes. A few shell and other
aquatic animals sent also colonies into fresh
waters.... This was the fifth period of
terrestrial events; that of terrestrial life.
</p>

<p>
Meantime the land was continuing to
rise, or the ocean to sink; the dry soil was
extending: land volcanoes began to appear
in the Andes and elsewhere, overwhelming
some living tribes. The carbonic volcanoes
had new paroxysms, slaty mud involved
terrestrial plants and trees in successive
eruptions: the clay mud or colored sand
was forming tertiary strata on the shores,
involving sea animals, shells, reptiles and
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
fishes.... This was the sixth period of terrestrial
events, that of land volcanoes.
</p>

<p>
After all these; mankind was created
by <hi rend='smallcaps'>God</hi>, and appeared as lord of the earth,
and the complement of living creation....
This may be deemed another Period, if we
like; although it was but the complement of
the terrestrial living productions, begun in
the 5th, and probably proceeding in the 6th.
Where the first man or men appeared and
dwelt, is unknown or very dubious. Asia
is commonly deemed the first dwelling of
mankind, and Central Asia or Thibet the
cradle of our race: although China, India,
Arabia, Syria, Ceylon, &amp;c., claim the same
honor. But few authors have placed this
cradle in America, and even then not for
the <hi rend='italic'>Adamites</hi>. Yet America had some
inhabitants before the flood, if we are to
believe the concurrent traditions of many
American nations; who keep the memory
of it, and point to their refuges.<note place='foot'>E-AD'M, Self-Adam, is the name
given by Moses to the first men, pronounced
since Adam. Gen. 1. v. 27; but called also
ZXR and N'K'BE or male and female.
The 2d AD'M or Adam was subsequent:
although the commentators have blended
them, as they have the floods, days and
other things. Our bible translation of early
events is besides very erroneous; the Talmudist
or Jewish version with points is not
correct, being in a late dialect: the true
text of Moses which I follow, has no points,
but admits of a sheva or soft breathing
between consonants.</note>

</p>

<p>
Of these American Anti-diluvians we
know little or nothing: their traces are few
and uncertain. It would be otherwise if
we could identify them with the anti-diluvian
<hi rend='italic'>Atlantes</hi>, or find their diluvial remains.
The skeletons found in Guadaloupe,
and on R. Santas of Brazil, by Captain
Elliott (described by Meigs in the transactions
of American philosophical society
1827) in tuffa with shells, may have been
buried there; like the mummies of many
American caves. Some of the American
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
mounds have appeared anti-diluvian; but
the fact is not well proved. The subterranean
antiquities are also of an equivocal
character. The town of log houses lately
found in Georgia, buried under golden clysmian
soil, cannot be so remote; the soil
instead of diluvial, may be a deep alluvial.
All the facts on these remote times, shall
be hereafter collected, presented and examined
carefully.
</p>

<p>
Thus, has been presented by geological
results, a rapid sketch of the American
periods, to the birth of mankind. These
6 periods or <foreign rend='italic'>yums</foreign>, are well ascertained as
to succession; but their duration is unknown:
and each of them includes several
subordinate periods; which it is not needful
to investigate in these outlines. The works
on geology may be consulted if required.
These 6 <foreign rend='italic'>yums</foreign> or great periods do not
answer exactly to the 6 <foreign rend='italic'>yums</foreign> or manifestations
of the mosaic cosmogony, since
geogony begins only with the 3d, ending
with the 5th.
</p>

<p>
Such oriental accounts are always deserving
our attention, and susceptible of
the deepest philosophical commentary, as
they mainly agree with all the detected
facts. But there are at least 3 accounts
of the creation or cosmogony in the <foreign rend='italic'>Sepher</foreign>
or Hebrew Bible. 1. That of Job. 2. Of
Moses in chapter 2d of Genesis from verse
4 to 25; in both, no <foreign rend='italic'>yums</foreign>, days nor periods
are mentioned. 3. The usual mosaic account
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
of chapter 1st. ending only at ch. 2,
v. 3. Even in this usual account more
than 7 periods can be found, including
heaven, earth and men.
</p>

<p>
These are the real Mosaic periods, with
his own names, very different from the subsequent
Jewish names, in various dialects.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Period of time or Yum.</hi> BRA-SHITH
Real beginning or Real Supreme
Being producing <hi rend='smallcaps'>Aleim</hi> the Angels,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Shmim</hi>
Heavens, and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Artz</hi> Earth.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> THEU-UBEU Chaos, and
THEUM Abyss, with RUH Spirit of God.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> AUR Essence of celestial light
or Ether. First divine manifestation of
<hi rend='italic'>Mshe</hi> or Moses.
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> RKIO Expanse or sky, diversion
of aerial and celestial fluids. 2d.
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> Sea and dry land, upheaving
of land over the waters, or subsiding of the
ocean. Vegetation. 3d.
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> Sun and Moon appearance by
a change in the misty atmosphere? with
XUXBIM stars? 4th.
</p>

<p>
7. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> Fishes and Fowls, &amp;c. 5th.
</p>

<p>
8. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> Beasts and cattle, with ADM
mankind or human emanation, our Adam,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zxr</hi> male, and <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nkbe</hi> female. 6th.
</p>

<p>
9. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Shbioi</hi> seventh manifestation,
<hi rend='italic'>Aleim</hi> became IEUE Jehovah, the living-self-with-self,
the supreme or powerful self.
</p>

<p>
10. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> AD emanation, our mist.
</p>

<p>
11. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> ADM into GN or <hi rend='italic'>Gan.</hi> our
Eden.
</p>

<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>

<p>
12. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> OTZ Growth, of lives with
good and evil.
</p>

<p>
13. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> NER 4 flowing emanations
or streams.
</p>

<p>
14. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> ASHE Intellectual man-mate,
called afterwards EUA living existence,
our Eve.&mdash;Self-with-life.
</p>

<p>
All these periods should require long
comments, and discussions, rather physical
than historical. It is by no means certain
that the sun and moon are implied in the 6th
yum. The text says a couple of MARTH
Centralities EMAUR-GDL and EMAUR-KTN
Self-great-ether greatest and lesser.
Some have seen here the solar and lunar
dynasties of Asia. The XUX-BIM might
be the XRUBIM of later times. The real
sun and moon may belong to the <foreign rend='italic'>yum</foreign> of
AUR. The stars, according to Job, were
in existence before the foundation of the
earth, and our astronomy teaches this
implicitly.
</p>

<p>
In this cosmogony, the heavenly creation
takes 4 periods. The grass grows by light
before the sun had appeared through the
misty atmosphere, and the fishes come after
the land and herbs, at the same period with
fowls. Our actual geology does not confirm
this last fact; but a proper explanation
of the biblic words would confirm the
truth.<note place='foot'><p>Geological comments are not here
required, my business is with mankind.
Moses calls men beside <foreign rend='italic'>Aish</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Anush</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>G'bforeign</foreign>, and women
<foreign rend='italic'>N'shim</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Itath</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Ashe</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Ashth</foreign>; which are perhaps as many names
of early tribes! as well as ALEIM or
<foreign rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign>, XRBIM <foreign rend='italic'>Cherubim</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Nahash</foreign>, &amp;c.
If these primitive names will offer any analogies
in America, they shall be thoroughly
pointed out hereafter. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hue</hi> is the real Eve.
See the chapter on the Mosaic Ontology
for many other human beings, or early
tribes. But it may be well to add here the
names of the beings of the 7th and 8th
Yums which we all deem animals, although
there are indications to the contrary.
</p>
<p>
7. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> The MIM waters produced
SH'R'TZ production&mdash;translated reptile!
No soul. N'F'SH-HIE, soul living. OUF,
Fowl, made to come from waters, and their
motion. LOUF'F means both flying and
flirting or swimming, G. 1. v. 20. But
ALEIM realized or created the TH'NI
NIM whales, or rather Great fishes, having
a soul living NFSH-EHIE, verse 21. This
fine word <hi rend='italic'>soul</hi> has been translated creature.
</p>
<p>
8. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yum.</hi> The earth produces with soul
BEME. Cattle or Herdsmen of life? v. 24.
R'M'SH, Reptiles or creeping Troglodytes?
HITHU, Beasts or Hunters. The <hi rend='smallcaps'>Beme</hi>
are perhaps Herdsmen! and all these
may be men, over whom Adam was to
reign, giving them names. Else all these
animals had real souls like men! The
fishes or fishermen D'G'TH only appear
in v. 26. at subjects of Adam.
</p>
<p>
Moses and the Hebrew poets divided the
animals in 3 classes, which represent also
men! and were personified.
</p>
<p>
1. SH'R'TZ, Production&mdash;Moses.
LUITH'N of Job. The Leviathan of
Poets.
</p>
<p>
2. N'F'SH, Animated&mdash;Moses. OZN or
Hozan of Poets.
Moses has 2 kinds of these: THNINIM
Aquatic, and OUF-XNF, Fowl strong
winged, as he had 2 of the last. SH'R'TZ,
aquatic reptile, and OUF aerial fowl.
</p>
<p>
3. HITHU, Beast: of 2 kinds, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Beme</hi> and
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rmsh</hi>, which are the BEMUTH of Job,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Behemoth</hi> of Poets.
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
Many still consider AISH intellectual
man as the human race, previous to <hi rend='italic'>Adam</hi>,
father of the Adamites; but the concurrent
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
proofs are very slender: nor is their posterity
known; unless <foreign rend='italic'>Nahash</foreign> or the snakes,
<foreign rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign> or the sons of God,
the <foreign rend='italic'>Rephains</foreign>
or giants, and the <foreign rend='italic'>Nephilim</foreign> or apostates,
be considered as such. Indications of races
of men different from the Adamites may be
collected both in the Bible, and in all the
ancient annals of China, India, Iran, &amp;c.;
but no positive connected account has ever
been made out as yet.
</p>

<p>
The <foreign rend='italic'>Nahash</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Hareth</foreign>
or <hi rend='italic'>Satan</hi> of the
Bible, is identic with the <foreign rend='italic'>Nagas</foreign> (snakes)
of the Hindus, the <foreign rend='italic'>Zabul</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Dives</foreign>, (devils)
of Iran, evidently men, and foes of the
Adamites: they are also the U-long or
antidiluvian dragons of China. In America
the satanic notions will be seen in the
respective account of religions. They
often assume in this hemisphere the appearance
of volcanic ideas, or of a vampire
malignant being. But the nations of the
Linapi group connect the ideas of devils,
snakes and foes, all called <foreign rend='italic'>Ako</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>N'akho</foreign>
very similar with <foreign rend='italic'>Nahash</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Nagas</foreign>.
They assert that they were created by the
Evil Spirit, were always foes of real men;
that they caused the flood, and went afterwards
to America before the Strait of Behring
was formed.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> Linapi Traditions.
</p>

<p>
The ALEIM, <foreign rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Egregori</foreign> or
angels of the Hebrew were instead sons of
God, and Moses ascribes to them the creation
of the earth; while Job ascribes it to
<foreign rend='italic'>Eloah</foreign>, the real God. Herder has said
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
that we shall never understand well the
mosaic history, until we ascertain who
were these <foreign rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Cherubim</foreign><note place='foot'>The
Cherubim were deemed Angels,
but of 4 sorts, 3 having faces of a lion,
ox, and eagle: which indicates tribes bearing
those names, or the 4 primitive castes
of mankind, the oxen referring to the laboring
caste, the lion to the militant caste.</note>
dwelling on earth. My dissertation on
anti-diluvian history may perhaps help to
clear the matter; meantime it may be
stated that they appear to be the HO-LO
of anti-diluvian Chinese history, or LO-LO
of their post-diluvian annals. Perhaps also
the celestial emperors beginning the history
of China: the <foreign rend='italic'>Alorus</foreign> first dynasty of Assyria
before the flood: the <foreign rend='italic'>Ang</foreign>-ELOS and
P'EL of the Pelagians. Also the H'ELLO
(old men) of the Egyptians, the PELEI
(old men or ancestors) of the ancient Illyrians,
the LAHI or ancient Thibetans.
</p>

<p>
They may be the ELEI or ancient Persians,
the <foreign rend='italic'>Peris</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Pelis</foreign> of Iran, ancient
beneficent beings. The Arabs and all the
Semetic nation have preserved that name
for God, in EL, <foreign rend='italic'>Allah</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Baal</foreign>, or made of
it their universal article <foreign rend='italic'>El</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Al</foreign>, meaning
HE or <hi rend='italic'>the Being</hi>: whence also the Pelagic
and Italic articles IL, L, LI, &amp;c., the
Spanish EL. By the frequent usual change
of L into R, we have ER root found in
many languages for men: forming the
<foreign rend='italic'>Heros</foreign> of Greece, sons of God; the HER
or lords of the Germanic tribes, the <foreign rend='italic'>Seres</foreign>
of Thibet or ancient Chinese, <foreign rend='italic'>Ergaz</foreign> men
of the African Atlantes. <foreign rend='italic'>Erk</foreign> man in Turkish
or Turan Atlantes, akin to <foreign rend='italic'>Egregori</foreign>!
</p>

<p>
In America these similar indications are
widely spread, and among the most ancient
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
nations. EL means man in Tolteca
and Mexican, OL is old and <foreign rend='italic'>Yollo</foreign> a spirit
or angel. EL is son and tribe in Hayti,
<foreign rend='italic'>Elohi</foreign> is
land and spirit in Tzuluki. <foreign rend='italic'>Yol</foreign>
means <hi rend='italic'>man</hi> in the Atakapa language of
the Cado or Nachez group. <foreign rend='italic'>Pele</foreign> means
the same in Lulé of South America; but
<foreign rend='italic'>Peli</foreign> is soul in Chilian, which approximate
to <foreign rend='italic'>Peleg</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Lelex</foreign>, ancient Pelagian
tribes. The connections with TEL, TAL,
TOL, pervade the whole of ancient America,
and lead to assimilate with the TOL-tecas
and TALAS, American Atlantes,
the Tulans or Asiatic Atlantes, the <foreign rend='italic'>Auto-Toles</foreign>
or African Atlantes. These lead to
the giants of both hemispheres or ancient
men of renown. But the subject must be
postponed, and will be found resumed in
the history of Austral and Central America,
where these atlantes and giants are
found.
</p>

<p>
Returning from this digression; we may
resume the geological periods of America
previous to mankind, in the six successive
epochas, already mentioned.
</p>

<p>
1. Period. Primitive, aquatic and before
life.
</p>

<p>
2. Period of aquatic organic life.
</p>

<p>
3. Period of aquatic cataclysms.
</p>

<p>
4. Period of the dry land or islands.
</p>

<p>
5. Period of terrestrial life.
</p>

<p>
6. Period of terrestrial volcanoes.
</p>

<p>
After which begins the human period,
till the flood. The question whether man
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
or men appeared together, or before or
after, in both hemispheres; must be left
undecided. Some writers have even placed
<hi rend='italic'>Eden</hi> the GN of Moses in America and
the Hesperidian Islands of old; but as the
Imalaya mountains, valleys and plains, are
higher than the Andes, older in geological
series, and more suitable for human life,
not being volcanic: it is extremely probable
that they were the cradle of mankind,
rather than America.
</p>

<p>
Yet men reached America before the
flood, and were here at this eventful period.
But we are ignorant of the precise way they
came, and how they reached this land
which was then only a group of large islands,
unless North America was united to
Asia by Behring Strait, as very probable.
The clearest traditions point to the east,
Africa and Europe then united at the
Strait of Gibraltar, and the Island Atlantis
as a stepping place. The Mexican traditions
point to Asia, by two different opposite
quarters, the east and the north west. The
Uskis or Innuit nations are late comers by
the north west. The Linapi nations, although
earlier, came the same way, and
over the ice of Behring Strait, after its
disruption. The Hongwis came the same
way, although they boast of being Autochtones,
as did the Greeks, which we know
in both instances to be false.
</p>

<p>
The Nachez nations say they came from
the east. The Olmecas or earliest people
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
of Anahuac point that way also; although
both speak of an American flood. The
Haytians and Cubans were also of eastern
origin, like all the Aruac nations; but remembered
the flood and parceling of the
islands. The Carib nations appear postdiluvians
and the last come in South America;
yet the Tamanacs one of the group speak
of an American flood. The Guarani call
themselves eastern men, and came from
Africa after the flood. It is in South
America, the Andes of Chili, Peru, &amp;c.,
that a positive memory was found of several
floods and cataclysms, in or near the Andes,
which gave refuge to several tribes.
Yet it is there also that the most obvious
philological affinities are found with North
Africa and the shores of the Mediteranean;
while many invasions of foreign later nations
are recorded, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
All these antidiluvian notions, and accounts
of the American flood, will be carefully
collected and given. This will form
the first period of human history in America,
extending to 2262 years at least, according
to the computation of the 70; the most
plausible of all. The Tol-tecas reckon
nearly the same time between their period
of creation and their main flood: or with
trifling differences, less than the various
terms of Josephus and others; but various
other calculations are found in Anahuac.
</p>

<p>
Such a period of 23 centuries was certainly
sufficient to people America, and fill
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
it. The Cainites or Cabils have been deemed
parents of the Atlantes and Africans.
They were skilful, powerful and wicked,
inventing agriculture and arts, building
cities &amp;c.: while the Sethites invented astronomy,
letters and dwelt in tents. If the
American Atlantes were antidiluvian, they
must have sprung from the Atlantes Cainites,
KIN of Moses.
</p>

<p>
In 1170 years after Adam, the <foreign rend='italic'>Egregori</foreign>
angels of Mt. Ima, came to Mt. Hermon,
in 20 tribes, under their king Semi-Azar,
and uniting with the Cainites, gave birth to
the <foreign rend='italic'>Rephaim</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Nephilim</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Eliud</foreign>, tribes
of Giants, tyrants and Canibals: who made
war on the angels and men. They are said
in the Bible to have gone to <foreign rend='italic'>Sheol</foreign> (the
lower world or South America) with their
king Belial: where they were drowned by
the flood. <hi rend='italic'>See Universal History.</hi>
</p>

<p>
The Giants dwelt in <foreign rend='italic'>Talo-tolo</foreign>, the world
<foreign rend='italic'>Tolo</foreign> of the Hindus, where we find the
<foreign rend='italic'>Tol</foreign>-tecas (Tol-people:) therefore America:
called also <foreign rend='italic'>Atala</foreign> and once sunk in the
waves; like the Atlantis of the Greek,
whose Atlantes were also Giants or powerful
men. The Egregori have been deemed
the Titans of the Greeks, and Atlas was a
Titan. Although Gigantic Nations existed
in America, the Talegas, Toltecas, Caribs,
Chilians, &amp;c. being often such: the term
Giant must always be understood to refer
to powerful perverse men. The names of
<foreign rend='italic'>Rephaim</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Nephilim</foreign> appear unknown in
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
America, being mere Hebrew epithets for
giants and apostates.
</p>

<p>
During this primitive period, geological
and physical changes probably proceeded
in America. The plains gradually appeared,
but full of marshes, lakes and wide
streams, muddy volcanoes, snakes, crocodiles
and obnoxious animals. Which must
have assailed mankind and greatly impeded
their settlements. Although the lives of
men were perhaps longer than now; yet it
is probable that the long lives of the Patriarchs
of this period, allude to as many
Dynasties or gradual nations sprung from
each other. In this I agree entirely with the
learned Hebrew scholar D'Olivet.<note place='foot'>See his learned work, translation and
paraphrase of the first chapters of Genesis:
wherein the best account of the creation,
antidiluvian history and flood has been
given.</note>
</p>

<p>
Huge beasts and carnivorous animals,
dwelt then on earth; in America several
species of mastodons, elephants, oxen, megatherium,
megalonyx, hyenas, bears, &amp;c.,
which prowled in plains and caves. The
temperature of the earth was higher; little
clothing was needed. Men were at war
with beasts, and among themselves. Violence
predominated in many regions, and
Noah one of the <foreign rend='italic'>M'nus</foreign> of the Hindus,
a patriarch of the Adamites, a prophet
according to the Arabs, went over the earth
to preach against this corruption. Not
being attended to, he foresaw that a great
calamity would befall for these iniquities,
and he prepared himself a THBE or refuge
in Central Asia: where he collected his
relations and friends. Some say they were
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
72, our translations of Moses reduces them
to 8; but his 3 sons of Noah, are evidently
as many tribes. The THBE of Noah contained
therefore 4 tribes, including his own,
and many individuals, besides a multitude
of animals.
</p>

<p>
I do not give now the history of this
flood. Before it can be given accurately,
we must collect all the scattered traditions
about it, compare them, and omitting all
fabulous and obviously impossible details,
form a narrative of the whole facts. The
notions and traditions of the Americans are
very various, as they do not always point
to this flood. We find them asserting that
men were saved in mountains, or caves, on
rafts or boats. Few, if any, allude to an
ark, but all to a refuge as THBE. Those
of Mexico and Peru, are contradictory, alluding
to several floods, and particularly
the subsequent of Peleg.
</p>

<p>
The most explicit traditions on that score
are those of the Linapi nations; although
the tribes vary the tale, the holy song of
the real Linapi tribe, alludes clearly to a
great flood in Asia: when their nations at
least was partly saved in <foreign rend='italic'>Tula</foreign> (the turtle
land) in Central Asia, by the help of a goddess,
and Noah or <foreign rend='italic'>Nana-bush</foreign>. The men
were then called <foreign rend='italic'>Linowi</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Linapi</foreign>: two
other races of men were saved, the <foreign rend='italic'>Owini</foreign>
(beings) and the <foreign rend='italic'>Tulapewi</foreign>, turtlings or
atlantes. Besides these foes the <foreign rend='italic'>Maskanako</foreign>
(strong snakes), <foreign rend='italic'>Nakowa</foreign> (dark
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
snakes), and the <foreign rend='italic'>Amangamek</foreign>, monsters
of the sea; who caused this dire flood.
These notions are strikingly similar to the
Asiatic and Hindu fables about the turtle
saving mankind at the flood. <foreign rend='italic'>Nana-bush</foreign>
is evidently Noah, his name means <foreign rend='italic'>Noah-Noah-hare</foreign>,
or the <hi rend='italic'>Great Noah</hi> and <foreign rend='italic'>Hare</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
The Chinese accounts of the first flood,
do not allude to any ark, but mountains
were the refuge of mankind. The Hindu
account is very near the mosaic; but has
no boat, and many persons were saved.
The accounts of the Assyrians, Arabs,
Tartars, Egyptians, Lybians, Greeks, Celts,
Polynesians, &amp;c. are all different. The
mosaic account was borrowed from some
ancient source now forgotten. It is said
that Noah himself wrote an account of the
flood, and preserved ancient records. Divesting
the mosaic account from the supernatural
and the impossible, we obtain the
real tradition of a great aquatic cataclysm.
Either a sinking of some lands or an irruption
of the ocean, attended with volcanic
floods of waters from the Caspian sea (as
Humboldt says,) heavy rains, and a change
of climate: which overflew the earth or
most of it; except some <foreign rend='italic'>Thebas</foreign>, refuges
in mountains, <hi rend='italic'>swimming</hi> over the waters,
as it were: there some men and tribes,
many animals, trees and plants were preserved:
to spread afterwards again over
the earth.
</p>

<p>
After this flood, America was left pretty
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
much as it is now, except that the shores
were higher yet, many flat plains inundated
and full of marshes. The Antilles yet united
in larger islands and perhaps with Cumana.
The Strait of Choco nearly filled
up: and diluvial soil, gravel, sand, boulders
and organic remains scattered over the
land, the hills, plains and caves. Many
fierce beasts had disappeared, vegetation
had been destroyed wherever the flood
went; but the buried seeds, and those of
mountain plants gradually grew or spread
again. The terrestrial animals and birds
saved in the mountains, spread themselves
again over the earth. Mankind in despair
at the disaster, kept for a long while on
mountains, and did not occupy again the
desolated hills and plains, until many years
after.
</p>

<p>
The Chinese account of this flood, state
positively that it was attended with a
change in the length of the year, formerly
of only 360 days, a change in the seasons,
an increase of cold, rain and winds: compelling
men to dress in skins and mats.
Also that the wild beasts and snakes driven
to the mountains, became very troublesome,
men being compelled to defend themselves
against their attacks.
</p>

<p>
The Rev. Gleig in his late history of the
Bible, where like Hales and Russel, he
has at last adopted the computation of the
Septuagint and Josephus, reckons 5411
years from Adam to our era, the oriental
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
Christians reckon 5508 years, the Toltecas,
reckoned 5099 years. Gleig puts Noah's
flood 2259 years after Adam. The Chinese
and Hindu chronology are partly
fabulous; but may be reconciled to these
periods; as well as to the second cataclysm
of the earth; that of Peleg according to
the Biblists. The only knowledge the Bible
gives about it, is that the earth was
split, broken or divided, in the time of the
patriarch or dynasty of Peleg; who lived
or lasted from 531 to 870 after Noah's
flood. But David has sung this cataclysm
in the 18th psalm. The Chinese account
brings this second flood to the year 2296
before Christ, or 858 years after the former.
The Hindu account concealed in many fables
agrees also with this period. But it
appears to have lasted longer, and many
years. It is evidently in date the mistaken
Hebrew flood, blending both into one, and
annihilating the place between them. The
Chinese account distinctly speaks of both,
the first was under <foreign rend='italic'>Yunti</foreign>, the second under
<foreign rend='italic'>Yao</foreign>, and 42 emperors are mentioned between
the two floods.
</p>

<p>
In America, it is often difficult to distinguish
which is meant by the various imperfect
traditions: yet in Mexico and Peru,
there are at least two cataclysms mentioned
by the annals or traditions. Also among
some northern tribes. The Linapi annals
or songs allude to the second, which broke
by volcanoes the <foreign rend='italic'>Lusasaki</foreign> (burnt land)
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
and separated America or <foreign rend='italic'>Akomenaki</foreign>
(snake island) from Asia to Behring strait.
</p>

<p>
Thus the real antidiluvian periods lasted
nearly 3000 years from Adam's epocha,
or 3212 by oriental computation. The
interval between Adam and Noah ought
to be called the Adamic period, that between
Noah and Peleg's floods the Noahic
period. It was at this last convulsion that
the earth took its actual form. The Straits
of Gibraltar, Calais, Messina, Hellespont,
Bosphorus, Babelmandel, Behring, Malaca,
Sunda, &amp;c., were then formed. The Atlantis
Island in the Atlantic Ocean and the
Island Lanca in the Indian Ocean were
sunk. The Azores, Madeira, Canaries,
&amp;c. are fragments of the Atlantis: Ceylon,
Madagascar, &amp;c. the fragments of
Lanca.<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Lanca</hi> was according to the Hindus
a big land under the equator, including
perhaps the Decan or south of India, then
separated by a sea from the Imalaya mountains,
now yet a vast level plain; and united
to Ceylon and other islands. It is in this
land of <hi rend='italic'>Lanca</hi> that many traditions place
Adam, with several early events.
</p>
<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Sunda</hi> land was very different, a
large peninsula south of Asia including
Java, Sumatra, Borneo &amp;c. Or perhaps
an island, if Malaca was separated from
Siam by a strait.</p></note>
</p>

<p>
In America, the Boreal islands may have
been broken, like the British islands of
Europe. Some suppose that they might
once join together with Iceland. The Antilles
were split in the actual form&mdash;Behring
Strait divided America from Asia.
The Polynesia lands were broken or sunk.
The lowlands of Chili, Peru, and the Atlantic
shores were inundated and then
partly left dry by huge volcanic tides.
This cataclysm was not a mere aquatic
flood; but a violent volcanic flood, having
at least three great focusses, 1. in the North
Atlantic Ocean, 2. In the Indian Ocean,
3. In Polynesia or the Pacific Ocean. In
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
China all the lowlands were overflowed
and partly overwhelmed. The great Islands
of Java and Sumatra were formed;
which formerly were united with Asia and
several islands in the vicinity, under the
remembered name of <foreign rend='italic'>Sunda</foreign> land.
</p>

<p>
If mankind had not reached America
before Noah, it must surely have reached
it before this second cataclysm. The Atlantes
were in the neighbourhood and bold
navigators, as well as the primitive Pelagians,
Lybians, Cantabrians; bearing then
various peculiar names, mostly traced in
America. Twenty American nations have
distinct remembrance of this splitting of
American lands and islands; local or partial
floods, less general and disastrous than
the former.
</p>

<p>
This cataclysm was not so deadly to
animals and vegetables as the former; but
it must have destroyed them in several
sunken islands: and have added second
clysmian strata to the soil of the plains:
with many volcanic productions, chiefly
clay and sand, limy and marshy muds.
The memorials, annals and traditions of
the American nations are very scanty on
this period; difficult to be distinguished
from the Adamic: while the monuments
to be referred to it, are not easily traced,
nor distinct in form. The <hi rend='italic'>Linapi</hi> tribes
had not yet reached America, and dwelt
in Asia; but by their account the Snake
tribes <hi rend='italic'>Akowi</hi> went to America in that period,
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
led by <hi rend='italic'>Nakopowa</hi> (the Snake priest);
it is even hinted that they caused this cataclysm
or at least the separation of Asia and
America, at <hi rend='italic'>Lusasaki</hi> (burnt land), in order
to escape their foes, the <hi rend='italic'>Elowi-chik</hi>
(hunters) of the <hi rend='italic'>Linnapewi</hi>, the original
manly people.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>General View</hi> <hi rend='italic'>of the Ancient and Modern
Annals of Both Americas.&mdash;european
Colonies, Modern Fate Of
Nations, Late Physical Changes, &amp;c.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
After these floods begin the primitive
annals of mankind in America as elsewhere;
but still scanty, obscure and involved
in fables, by personifications of
tribes, metamorphoses into animals, plants,
fruits or even stones and mountains. The
origin of nearly all the nations is neither
clear nor well ascertained, by their mere
annals; but the collateral proofs of the
languages facilitate the enquiry. Those
who have the most positive facts of primitive
times are the Ongwis, Linapis, Toltecas,
Tainos, Peruvians, &amp;c.; but commonly
destitute of dates and correct details. We
ought not to be surprised at this, since even
in Asia (except in China,) we possess nothing
but fragments on those times; while
the most polished nations of oldest times,
the Egyptians, Greeks, Persians, Arabs,
Jews, &amp;c. have involved their early histories
in fables, mythologies and false dates.
</p>

<p>
However, whatever might be the early
origin of the American nations, it may be
collected from all, that in the ancient periods;
they were few in number and in
population; principally confined to some
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
peculiar seats of civilization: such as the
regions of Apalacha, Hayti, Anahuac,
Oaxaca, Chiapa, Maya, Cundina, Oronoc,
and Peru. We have positive proofs of
early empires and splendid monumental
cities at Teoti-huacan, Otolum, Coban &amp;c.
in Central America; and in South America
at Chimu, Tiahuanaco &amp;c.; while
cities and monuments of a lesser order or
size, were scattered afterwards from the
Lakes of Canada and the River Ohio, to
Chili and Brazil: probably through the
dispersion and colonization of these early
empires or states.<note place='foot'>The monumental archeology and history
of America, is not the least curious.
Humboldt opened the way; but did little:
the facts since collected in Central and
North America, will astonish all the reflecting
minds, and lead us to times of great
civilization and prosperity. In the single
small state of Kentucky, have already been
found the sites of 200 ancient towns in
ruins, or having monuments. If as many
exist in all the neighbourhood, there must
have been 2000 towns in North America,
west and south of the Apalachian mountains.
Many earthy remains are gradually
disappearing under the plough, and will be
obliterated ere long.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>See</hi> my account of
monumental sites, published in 1824.</note>
</p>

<p>
After they had filled the most fruitful or
suitable regions, carrying with them agriculture,
domestic animals, religion, laws
and various graphic systems: they were
invaded by tribes less civilized; but more
warlike; principally in North America,
and in Guyana, Brazil &amp;c. Many revolutions
must have followed these contests:
some of which are recorded in the Apalachian
region of the United States, in the
Mexican table land, in Hayti &amp;c. and by
the Muyzcas, Peruvians &amp;c. further south:
while in Guyana and Brazil the annals are
lacking, and the traces of these conflicts
but faint; yet certified by some traditions
and the new tribes introduced.
</p>

<p>
The solar worship prevailed among the
most civilized nations and empires: that
of Naguals or Zemis (spirits) among those
of the second degree. The least civilized
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
nations had either adopted the Dualism or
a mixed religion: while the barbarous
tribes knew only a kind of <hi rend='italic'>Tao</hi> religion as
in China,<note place='foot'>The Tao is one of the earliest religions
of China. It is the personification
and worship of the powers of nature, the
earth, air, winds, thunder, sea, mountains,
lakes, trees &amp;c. The spiritual worship of
their souls is the purest part of it, while the
blind material worship of the objects themselves
is the degradation of it, as in Egypt
and Guinea.</note> or a fetichism, venerating one
or many objects of nature. But these four
main worships, were subject to many fluctuations,
and diversities: they had often
degenerated into a Polytheism, and idolatry,
with various rites, and some cruel
customs, human sacrifices &amp;c. A kind
of priesthood was almost universal and
formed a peculiar caste in many states.
The legislators and rulers had often been
priests, and became pontifs as well as
kings, in Cuzco, Chimu, Tunca, Mayapan,
Cholula, Manazicas &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
During a period of 2 or 3000 years after
the floods, the earth had undergone many
changes by volcanoes, earthquakes and the
subsiding of the sea. Many valleys were
drained, their lakes lessened or disappeared;
the shores of the Atlantic from
New Jersey to Florida and Yucatan, and
from La Plata to Magellania, as well as
those of Peru, Chili &amp;c. were increased
by the gradual retreat of the sea. The
great plains of the Mississippi, Oronoc,
Maranon and Parana were also formed or
drained of their swamps and morasses.
</p>

<p>
It is at the end of this epocha, equal to
the antecedent antidiluvian period, that
the real or certain history of the Americans
begins with many details and dates;
both in the north and south. It was then
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
that the empires of the Toltecas, Utatlans,
Mexicans, Apalachis, Mayapans, Incas &amp;c.
were established on the ruins of many anterior
states. We obtain by the annals
preserved or recovered of many such nations,
a tolerable view of this part of their
history, and even an insight into earlier
times, when similar revolutions must have
happened. If many states or nations rose
and fell in this hemisphere, unknown to the
other: it was a common fate with others
in Africa, Polynesia and even in Asia.
But we may hope to rescue their names if
not their deeds, from total oblivion, by
seeking their monuments, and the fragments
of human tribes they left to mourn
their fate.
</p>

<p>
In this period some American nations
rose to a degree of splendor and civilization,
with knowledge of arts and sciences,
little inferior to Greeks and Romans; and
superior to the European nations of the
middle ages, even down to 1492: quite
equal at least to that of the Egyptians and
Hindus. The American graphic systems
of Apalacha, Anahuac, Maya, Otolum,
Peru; although peculiar, were quite sufficient
to transmit knowledge in books,
schools and inscriptions. This high civilization
was not merely confined to Mexico
and Peru, as often erroneously supposed;
but was scattered from the Apalachis and
Nachez of Florida to the Chilians south of
Peru, filling the whole intermediate space.
</p>

<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>

<p>
Although war and slavery prevailed in
many parts, they were modified by the
usage of adoption for individuals and whole
tribes, mutual alliances, confederacies &amp;c.:
while slavery was changed into a feodal
vassalage. The feodal system and the
castes prevailed in all civilized nations of
America, as in India and Asia from earliest
time.
</p>

<p>
Instead of perpetual wars the ancient
annals of America, present us with the
soothing view of wise legislators, who gave
civilization and happiness to millions for
ages, and conquered by deeds of peace.
Such were most of the conquests of the
Bohitos, Bochicas, Incas, Quetzals, Cuculcans,
Tzomes, Maponos, Tamanends, Tarenyos
&amp;c. worthy lawgivers of the Antilles,
Muyzcas, Peru, Anahuac, Mayas, Guaranis,
Manazicas, Linapis, and Ongwis. I
shall revive, with pleasure, their memory
and deeds, dwelling on them with more
pleasure than on the cruel war leaders.
</p>

<p>
To them the Americans were indebted
for their policy, diplomacy, alliances, agriculture
and knowledge, with the peculiar
happy mode of holding the land in common
or feodal tenure, with property in tenements
and moveables. To them may be
traced the introduction of useful plants,
the maize, cotton, quinoa, patatas, yams,
manioc, banana, gourds, beans, and 100
other cultivated plants and fruits. The
Mexicans had even botanic gardens and
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
pleasure grounds before the modern Europeans.
The universities of Cuzco, Tunca,
Tezcuco, Cholula, Mayapan, Utatlan &amp;c.
were founded earlier than the European
universities by such benefactors of mankind;
and 112 domestic animals had been
tamed in America, while only 80 in the
eastern hemisphere. Of which must be
reckoned.<note place='foot'>See my Memoir on the Domestic
Annnals of Both Hemispheres, 1832, Atlantic
Journal, where the names of all are
given. But I have collected a few more
since.</note>
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2.2cm} p{2.7cm} p{2cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(17) lw(15) lw(15)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>In the W. Hemisphere.</cell>
     <cell>In the Eastern.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Quadrupeds</cell><cell>33 kinds</cell><cell>only 25 kns.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Birds</cell><cell>32</cell><cell>25</cell></row>
<row><cell>Reptiles</cell><cell>15</cell><cell>10</cell></row>
<row><cell>Fishes</cell><cell>12</cell><cell>10</cell></row>
<row><cell>Insects</cell><cell>8</cell><cell>4</cell></row>
<row><cell>Shells and worms</cell><cell>12</cell><cell>6</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
The modern history of America since
1492 presents a multitude of events with
regular dates: but the historians of these
later times instead of dwelling upon the
native nations, appear to notice them merely
<hi rend='italic'>en passant</hi>! while relating at length the
discoveries, conquests and wars of the European
adventurers and colonists.
</p>

<p>
It is not thus that we are to notice them;
but as equal nations. Now that after four
ages, these colonies are also become independent
nations, and begin to nurse American
feelings, we ought to feel for them,
and reveal the truth. It is not number
nor dominion alone that constitute a people;
but a peculiar language, and peculiar
manners. The modern history of the
Araucanians, Guaranis, Caribs, and North
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
American tribes, is the best known by peculiar
fragments; but similar fragments
may be collected on many other tribes.
</p>

<p>
Meantime Columbus came, another leader
of colonists to America; since many
had come before him: and with him came
the ferocious gold hunters of Castille; who
in their greedy search after golden wealth,
trampled under foot, both religion and humanity.
They enslaved, tortured and destroyed
millions of human beings from
Hayti to Mexico and Peru; but were
checked at last in Florida, Chili, Tologalpa,
Santa Marta &amp;c. They overthrew
many flourishing states, and erected over
them a slavish colonial fabric, soon after
sunk in sloth and ignorance.<note place='foot'>By admixture with American women,
the Spaniards formed a mixed race in
Hayti, Mexico, Peru, Paraguay &amp;c.;
called Cholas, Mestizos &amp;c.; which partook
of the qualities and vices of both
races; few great men have been produced
by them; although we know of some
exceptions. Lavega one of the best American
historians was son of a Peruvian
princess by a Spaniard. In Paraguay the
Spaniards having no women, took Guarani
concubines, and all their offsprings were of
mixt breed, a sad set, like the Mamalucos
of Brazil born from Portuguese and Tupi
women. These instances, and the production
of mulatoes subsequently, teach us
how some former nations were born in
America.</note>
</p>

<p>
The dissentions of Mexico and Peru were
the cause of their ruin and subjugation by
the Spaniards; but the Floridans, Apaches
Tayronas, Poyays, Caribs, Mbayas, Chilians
&amp;c. withstood forever their utmost efforts,
and never were conquered. The happy
states of Yucatan, Guatimala, Tunca, Hayti,
Cuba &amp;c. fell by their unwarlike and peaceful
friendly disposition; being cruelly betrayed
and desolated.
</p>

<p>
In the east, Brazil was occupied by the
Portuguese, where a bastard tribe of Mamalucos
were born; who sought for slaves
and gold, from Guayana to Paraguay, and
destroyed many tribes. After these unworthy
freebooters, came the rabble of
pirates and buccaneers to revenge American
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
wrongs, upon the Spaniards and Portuguese
by deeds of cruelty. Thus was
America flooded with blood, and groaning
in tears for nearly three centuries. But
even these horrible deeds were not the
only ones to deplore. Not satisfied with
the weak labor of American slaves; another
continent was overrun, to supply
stronger hands, and Africa was made to
contribute millions of slaves to swell American
population, or sink there to premature
death under the lashing scourge of cruel
tasks.
</p>

<p>
The English, French, and Dutch wishing
to partake of the American spoils, went in
search of wealth all over the shores of this
continent. Not satisfied with mere trading
colonies, as in India, they sent stationary
colonies of slaves and planters, to occupy
some weak points, with or without the
consent of the nations. The Dutch settled
in Brazil, Surinam, Curazao and New York.
The French in Canada, Louisiana, Florida,
Hayti, the Carib Islands, Cayenne and Brazil;
but have gradually lost all those colonies,
except Cayenne and a few Carib Ids.
</p>

<p>
The English nation, more daring, steady
and lucky, occupied with their auxiliaries,
the Scotch and Irish, some points of the
Atlantic shores, many Carib Islands &amp;c.:
by conquest they acquired New York, Canada,
Demerary, Jamaica and some smaller
islands. Since, whenever the Europeans
were at war among themselves, they carried
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
their quarrels over the ocean, and endeavored
to destroy each other. Laterly
among them arose in North America the
holy flame of freedom and independence,
which has been travelling and spreading
throughout the continent, ever since.
</p>

<p>
But among these contending colonies and
slaving plantations, how were the owners
of the soil, treated and dealt with? Alas!
seldom with justice&mdash;Popes and kings gave
away lands and rights, which did not belong
to them; nobles and merchants, availing
themselves of this doubtful right, bought
with trifling presents the good will of some
tribes, or drove them away by force. Thus
were settled most of the American colonies;
except a few, attempted in a spirit of religion
and peace.
</p>

<p>
The worthy Las-Casas, immortal be his
name! gave the example of reducing unsubdued
tribes to peaceful allies, by words
and deeds of peace and piety, and Tezutlan
thus reduced by him was called Verapaz.
When the Spanish and Portuguese freebooters
were sunk in wealth and sloth;
they found it very convenient to employ
the Jesuits and other monks to subdue for
them whole tribes and nations, by this easy
mode. In North America, Roger Williams
and William Penn, blessed be their
names! settled colonies without strife, and
by mere good will towards the owners of
the soil. But every where the foes or
successors of these missionaries of peace,
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
deceived or betrayed the allies they had
made. Unjust wars were the natural consequence,
in which the rightful party, did
not often prevail, being overpowered by
strength and cunning.
</p>

<p>
Meantime the independent period opens
a new era for America. In 1776 the
United States of North America confederate
and become free. Seventeen years
afterwards the black slaves of Hayti unfurl
the standard of broken chains. Between
1808 and 1820 the whole of Spanish America
shakes the weak power of Spain. In
1822 the whole of Brazil becomes an
American empire. Slavery is abolished
in all the Spanish states, only retained in
the colonies of Cuba and Porto Rico. In
1834 England emancipates the slaves of
all her colonies. Slavery was gradually
excluded from many states of N. America,
at early periods; but others from Virginia
to Louisiana are tenacious of these unholy
and dangerous bonds.
</p>

<p>
Now, the native American tribes within
the claimed territories of these new independent
nations, are under a sort of pupilage,
and often oppressed: although no
longer slaves from Canada to Chili. Brazil
alone admits of indescriminate slavery,
and will rue the consequence at some
future period, like those colonies and states
that delay wiser measures. Meanwhile at
the two ends of America, in Canada and
the United States, as in Buenos Ayres, a
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
new kind of oppression has appeared.
Land stealing and compulsory sales! unhallowed
means to increase wealth, nearly
as guilty as the precious Spanish gold
hunting.
</p>

<p>
The United States which ought to set
the wisest example, of justice and clemency,
towards reduced tribes, diminished
by vices taught instead of virtues, are doing
the reverse. They refuse to amalgamate
the native tribes, admit them to equal
rights, as in the new Spanish States; but
compel them to submit to laws not understood,
in a language untaught, or disqualify
them for witnesses. They compel them to
remove, emigrate, disperse, sell their lands
and homes, at one tenth of the value; and
this is called fair dealing!
</p>

<p>
Notwithstanding that the European states
or colonies, occupy or claim, nearly the
whole of both Americas; yet there are
many vast regions as yet unsettled by them,
and where dwell or wander several free
tribes, particularly in the Arctic wilds,
in Oregon, California, Texas, the Missouri
plains, New Mexico, Sinaloa, Tologalpa,
in N. America&mdash;and in S. America in the
vast plains and deserts of the Oronoko,
Maranon, Brazil, Chaco, Chili and Magellania.
The most prominent of these modern
tribes are the Uskis or Esquimaux,
the Dinnis, the Chopunish, Dacotas or
Sioux, Panis or Skerés, Washas or Ozages,
Chactas, Tzulukis, Apaches or Cumanches,
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
Poyays or Musquitos &amp;c. In South
America, the Aruacs, Caribs, Omaguas,
Maynas, Aymaras, Puris, Mbayas, Araucas,
Talahets or Pampas &amp;c. All divided into
many lesser tribes and independent communities.
</p>

<p>
Instead of endeavoring to civilize them
by fair means and deeds of peace, many
continue to be exasperated by unfair dealings,
greedy traders, intemperance, and
above all by killing their game, and stealing
their lands. Some missions are established
from Groenland to Chili; but the
intercourse of the majority is with traders,
trappers, land-hunters or squatters, and the
military of the frontiers: from whom they
can imbibe no very favorable idea of their
oppressors.
</p>

<p>
How is this to end? Is it really intended
to grasp the whole continent, and make
these fragments of nations, aliens on their
own soil? or to annihilate them at last?
Beware! men of bad faith, or greedy of
landed wealth! There is a God in heaven,
and he deals justly with nations as with
men. He may find means to punish you,
if you continue to violate the sacred laws
of mankind. The desperate tribes, either
become stronger by concentration, or acquired
knowledge, may fall on you at last,
like so many Goths and Vandals, Huns
and Tartars, to revenge their wrongs, and
desolate this land wrongly acquired. Or
among you will arise Agrarian sects, that
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
will deprive your children of this landed
property so unjustly acquired and held.
</p>

<p>
Be wise and just in time, if cupidity
does not blind you, imitate the happy policy
of Mexico, Guatimala, Peru &amp;c. that
has admitted the natives to equality and
citizenship. Do better still, allow them to
form peculiar states and territories, preserving
their languages and laws, and
admit these states into your confederacies.
Then you will be secure, and both live in
peace, increasing and multiplying as time
rolls on. There is land enough for all, and
to spare. What need has a man of 1000
acres of land; while 100 can support a
large family! in the cold climates, and 10
acres in the fruitful tropical climates, where
thrive the banana and the sugar cane. If
hunters require a large wilderness to sustain
their mode of life, greedy worshippers
of mammon wish for 10,000 acres to hold
waste for speculation! or to fill with plantations
of slaves and tenants, in order to
become lords of future generations; but
the real wise and active men, the props of
society, are content with moderate, secure
estates, which they may improve and beautify
into smiling gardens.
</p>

<p>
The modern intercourse of the two hemispheres
has been productive of much
more misery, than mutual benefit. The
Americans have received the European
cattle without imparting to Europe, their
equally useful Peruvian cattle; they have
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
received the horse, and often adopted him
as a friend, to become Tartars and Arabs
by his help, so as to retaliate mischief on
the cruel Spaniards. Some European fruits
and grains have been received and cultivated:
while all have been introduced into
the colonies. Woolen cloth, blankets, iron
and copper kettles, tools, trinkets, guns and
gunpowder, with the liquid poisons of the
still, have been spread by trade. These
last with horses and guns, have been the
chief deadly weapons of Europe against
America.<note place='foot'>The Missouri tribes, Panis and Cumanches,
the Abipons and Talahets of the
vast plains of N. and S. America; are already
become wandering horsemen like
Tartars, quite formidable in war. Many
tribes now possess and use guns. Brandy,
rum and whiskey, liquors of hell, ... make
the savage foes furious and reckless: they
have killed as many as guns have. The
small pox is another scourge sent to America
from Europe, the Cholera may be
another. The Syphilis wrongly ascribed
to America, has been traced to the ancient
continent also: although it was returned
from hence again, like maize.</note>
</p>

<p>
In return, Europe has received gold, silver
and precious furs: pearls and diamonds,
cochineel, annato, indigo, die woods, vicunia
wool, cacao, vanilla, gum elastic and many
other useful or medical articles. Maize, returning
east whence it came; with tobacco,
a loathsome weed of heathen growth and
rites. Human knowledge has been increased,
and trade greatly enlarged; the
tame cavias, with turkeys and musky-ducks
have been transmitted. Thus Europe has
been the gainer, and was for a long while
jealous of these treasures.<note place='foot'>The precious commodities of America
are numberless. If the Europeans had
traded there for them, as they now do in
China, Persia, Arabia and Africa, how
different would have been the fate of America?
Iron would have purchased gold
and pearls, with every thing else: there
was no need to use the steel swords, nor
thundering guns. Coffee and rice are not
American productions, but lately introduced
from Arabia and India. The origin
of the sugar cane is also oriental; but it
was found wild in South America, as
orange trees were in Florida.</note>
</p>

<p>
Under the pious guise of hypocrisy, the
heavenly religion of Jesus, was offered or
forced upon many American nations, by the
same men, who were behaving worse than
heathens, worshipping gold and mammon
with the earth itself, bathed in human blood
and tears; introducing slavery and over
toils; exulting in deeds of cruelty, revenge,
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
wanton lust, cupidity and avarice; with all
the other anti-christian vices. If Mexico
had ghastly idols and cruel rites; Hayti,
Cuba, Bogota, Peru &amp;c. had not; but
peaceful, harmless worships: to which was
substituted the papal worships of other idols,
saints and monks. The pure undefiled religion
of love and peace to all mankind, was
seldom introduced in America, even by the
Jesuits&mdash;except by the heavenly Las-Casas,
the friendly quakers, the humane moravians,
and a few other christian missionaries. All
the sects of christianity have now spread to
America, and even some arisen there; nay,
the Jews have reached this continent, with
a few Mahometans, Hindus, Chinese, Budhists
&amp;c. Thus all the religions of the
earth are now found in this hemisphere, by
the tolerance and freedom of opinions lately
proclaimed in many parts.
</p>

<p>
Great has been the influence of 3 or 4
ages, on the American tribes, that have
been enslaved, or in frequent communication
with the nations of Europe&mdash;not in
religion alone; but in dress, manners,
knowledge, civilization and pursuits. The
alphabetical writing has been introduced
among them, the Tzulukis have invented
a syllabic alphabet; some arts, and the
pastoral nomadic life have been adopted.
In the boreal regions, the English and
Russians employ the hunting tribes as providers
of furs. In South America the
native tribes are often skillful fishermen or
traders.
</p>

<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>

<p>
Upon the whole, the late prospects of
America are cheering. Many independent
nations have sprung, which deem themselves
Americans, and love their homes.
A general spirit of tolerance and peace is
spreading, the true religion of the heart
better understood; and a disposition is
evincing to render tardy justice to the oppressed
tribes, and the poor slaves. Those
who wish oppression and intolerance to be
perpetuated, are not many in this continent,
at present; they will be fewer still in
half a century or the year 1892.
</p>

<p>
Thus, mankind lives in fluctuations of
mind and manners. A few ages have been
sufficient to produce these mighty changes.
Meanwhile, nature although changing slower,
is still at work on the soil of this hemisphere.
Since 1492 volcanoes have appeared
and disappeared, the sea shores have receded,
the lakes are falling, the streams are
lessening, the mountains are crumbling, the
swamps are draining: immense forests have
been cut, and changed into ploughed fields,
hills have been cut or ploughed, roads,
causeways and canals made, splendid cities
have been built, with innumerable towns
and villages. The deltas of the Mississippi
and Magdalena have been cultivated, many
mines dug for metals or coals. The face
of the country has been quite changed in
these new seats of civilization; in the regions
of Apalacha from Canada to Louisiana,
in Guyana, Brazil; but in the western
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
regions from Mexico to Chili, agriculture
has rather receded: they had at least as
many towns and fields in ancient times.
</p>

<p>
Earthquakes and irruptions of the sea
have caused sad changes in other parts,
gulfs have been formed on the coast of
Cumana, Callao twice sunken in volcanic
tides, mountains and cities overthrown from
Popayan to Chili: while the alluvial formations
proceed along the streams and shores;
their floods are perennials, increasing deltas
and islands: Hurricanes scatter ruins and
dismay over the Antilles, whirlwinds prostrate
strips of forests. The spouting springs
and earthy volcanoes eject water, mud,
clay and marl, pitch and other substances.
The water volcanoes drown valleys and
cities, have ruined Guatimala, and desolated
Quito. Mexico near a lake and often
overflowed by it, is now distantly removed;
the lake having been drained by nature and
art jointly combined.<note place='foot'>The physical changes undergone in
America within late historical recollections
are very numerous, and ought to be collected
into one connected body by historians
or geologists.</note>
</p>

<p>
These rapid sketches and views offer a
connected picture of men and soil, in this
hemisphere, during the ages past. The
detailed local annals of the various nations,
will enlarge the subject, and present the
required outlines of the ancient and modern
events of both.
</p>

<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>

<milestone unit='tb' rend=' rule: 50%'/>

<p>
After these general topics on American
history, I had proposed to enter upon the
peculiar annals of nations, beginning by
Peru and Austral America; but wishing to
give in this first volume something still
more novel and striking, I have concluded
to begin by the original unpublished annals
of the Linapis, and the neglected traditions
of the Haytians; who assert to have come
into America, by the north west, and the
second through the Atlantic Ocean. I
hear besides that a French traveller D'Orbigny,
is now publishing in Paris, his travels
in Austral and Peruvian America, with
60 vocabularies of languages: where I may
perhaps find additioned materials for the
history of those regions.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Original Annals and Historical Traditions
of the</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Linapis</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>from the creation
to the flood, passage and settlements
in America, as far as the Atlantic
Ocean &amp;c., till 1820 &amp;c.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
We have but few real American Annals,
given in the original peculiar style. Those
of Mexico, Guatimala, Apalacha, Hayti,
Peru, &amp;c., have all been translated by
abridgements or paraphrases. Those of
the <hi rend='italic'>Ongwi</hi> by Cusick come nearest to the
aboriginal form, using the usual personifications
and animalizations of tribes, so
common all over America and Asia; but
so often misunderstood: having perplexed
and disgusted the commentators or translators;
who did not seize this form of style.
Even in China, the primitive inhabitants
often bear the names of beasts, <hi rend='italic'>Lung</hi> dragons,
<hi rend='italic'>Chi</hi> birds, <hi rend='italic'>Yao</hi> wolf,
<hi rend='italic'>Miao</hi> tygers.
In India we find snakes, monkeys, lions &amp;c.
Early in Europe are dogs <hi rend='italic'>Canari and
Cynetes</hi>, satyrs, lions &amp;c., syrens, harpies,
pegasus, centaurs, faunes, cyclops &amp;c.<note place='foot'><p>These
two figures of speech, <hi rend='italic'>Personification</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Animalization</hi>, are two of the
keys of ancient history. By the first is not
meant alone the personification of the passions
or divine attributes; but likewise the
individuality of men, tribes and nations
pervading primitive history, by the frequent
substitution of the singular for the plural,
as was done by the Asiatics, the Greeks,
and the Americans. It is thus that the
ancient patriarchs, Hercules, Heros, Gods
&amp;c. are often meant for their followers;
the head for the whole set or social body.
This practice has survived to our days,
and we mean all the English when we speak
of <hi rend='italic'>John Bull</hi>, the Russians by the <hi rend='italic'>Northern
Bear</hi> (a kind of animalization), all
the Turks by <hi rend='italic'>the Grand Turk</hi> &amp;c. The
reverse mode of speech or the employment
of the plural for the singular, is less frequent:
but used when we substitute in our
modern languages, <hi rend='italic'>We</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>You</hi> instead of
I or Thee. It was less common anciently,
yet it appears Moses employed it when he
called God, ALEIM our <foreign rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign> or <hi rend='italic'>the
Angels</hi>, and polytheism was the consequence
of similar mistakes or substitutions;
but in his account of the patriarchs, he has
used the individuality of tribes.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Animalization</hi> pervades the whole of the
fabulous periods of history. It is to this
mode of speech that we owe the fables of
Pilpay and Esopus, where animals are
made to speak. Whenever we meet in
history or fables, animals acting like men
and conversing, they are surely men, and
often tribes individualized by an animal
appellation: such as might be emblematic
or patronymic, adopted honorable names,
as lion, tyger, eagle; or else nicknames
given in derision by foes, such as snake,
dog, ape &amp;c. Even the Hebrew had their
<foreign rend='italic'>Cherubim</foreign>, who were beings like a man, a
lion, ox, and eagle; who drove the Adamites
from Eden. This name is preserved
by the Turks in <foreign rend='italic'>Cherabi</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Chelabi</foreign>, which
means <hi rend='italic'>Lords</hi> in the old Turkish language
of Turan or Tartary. Perhaps also in the
<foreign rend='italic'>El-abi</foreign>, now Arabians,
which meant <hi rend='italic'>Angel-fathers</hi>,
or our forefathers the angelic men.
<foreign rend='italic'>Elapi</foreign> means
<hi rend='italic'>the most manly</hi> in Linapi!
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
In the Antilles the first inhabitants were
called beasts or <foreign rend='italic'>Caracol</foreign>,
turtles <foreign rend='italic'>Icota</foreign>,
birds, opossums, seals, trees, stones, even
gourds and fruits.&mdash;(Roman's Trad.) In
Peru we find tygers, lions, giants, pygmies,
snakes &amp;c. In Mexico, birds, apes, snakes,
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
tygers, giants &amp;c. While throughout North
America we find tribes of beavers, turtles,
wolves, dogs, deer, birds. We must learn
to appreciate this primitive form of speech
and style, as allegorical names of men &amp;c.
It is very needful in order to understand
the following narratives.
</p>

<p>
Having obtained, through the late Dr.
Ward of Indiana, some of the original
<foreign rend='italic'>Wallam-Olum</foreign> (painted record) of the
Linapi tribe of Wapahani or White River,
the translation will be given of the songs
annexed to each: which form a kind of
connected annals of the nation. In the
illustrations of this history, will be figured
the original glyphs or symbols, and the
original songs, with a literal translation,
word for word. This will furnish a great
addition to our knowledge of American
graphics and philology; but here the annals
are chiefly interesting historically. I
have translated, however, all the historical
and geographical names, so as to afford a
better clue to the whole.<note place='foot'>The word
<foreign rend='italic'>Olum</foreign> is remarkable, because
it is analogous to the <hi rend='smallcaps'>Olen</hi>, the
legislator and teacher of Runes of the
Celts. The writings of the Druids and
Irish were called <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ocol</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Callan</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ogham</hi>,
the Irish <hi rend='smallcaps'>Olam</hi> were recorders and teachers.
<foreign rend='italic'>Olum</foreign> does not properly mean a writing,
since <foreign rend='italic'>Leki</foreign> is book, paper or letter in
Linapi; but it implies <hi rend='italic'>a record</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>a notched
stick</hi>, an engraved piece of wood or bark.
It comes from <foreign rend='italic'>Ol</foreign> hollow or graved record.
Hekewelder says that <foreign rend='italic'>Oluma-pisid</foreign> was in
the 18th century, a king of the Linapis on
the river Susquehanna, who kept the <foreign rend='italic'>Olum</foreign>
or records of the nation. It is probable
these were part of them.</note>
</p>

<p>
We knew by all the writers who have
had friendly intercourse with the tribes of
North America, that they did possess, and
perhaps keep yet, historical and traditional
records of events, by hieroglyphs or symbols,
on wood, bark, skins, in stringed
wampuns &amp;c.; but none had been published
in the original form. This shall be
the first attempt. Lederer saw 200 years
ago in Carolina, wheels of 60 rays, recording
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
events of 60 years. Humboldt has
mentioned the glyphical symbols of the
Hurons on wood, seen by the Jesuits.
Heckwelder saw the <foreign rend='italic'>Olumapi</foreign> or painted
sticks of the Linapis; but did not describe
them; he merely translated some of their
traditional tales: which agree in the main,
with these historical songs; yet the songs
appear mere abridgments of more copious
annals, or the bases of the traditions. The
Ninniwas or Chipiwas, the Ottowas, the
Sakis and Shawanis &amp;c., all Linapi tribes,
have such painted tales and annals, called
<foreign rend='italic'>Neobagun</foreign> (male tool) by the former. Tanner
has figured some of these pictured
songs or <foreign rend='italic'>Neobagun</foreign>, in his interesting Narrative.
Loskiel has stated that the Linapis
had complete genealogies, with symbols
expressing the deeds of each king. Beatty
in 1766 saw records 370 years old.
</p>

<p>
Out of these materials and other kept by
the Ozages, Cowetas, Tzulukis, Panis &amp;c.,
might be formed or restored a peculiar
graphic system of north America, different
from the Mexican system; and probably
once imported from Asia: where it may
be compared with the graphic symbols of
the Kuriles, Yakuts, Koriaks &amp;c., indicated
by Humboldt; but which are unknown
to me. Meantime I shall give
materials for such researches in my illustrations.
The symbols, when met alone,
were inexplicable; but by obtaining the
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
words or verses, (since they must commonly
be sung) we may acquire enough to lead on
further enquiries. The most obvious peculiarity
of this system, is that each symbol
applies to a verse or many words; as if the
ideas were amalgamated in the compound
system: yet they may often be analyzed,
and the elements ascertained or conjectured,
by their repetition.
</p>

<p>
These historical songs of the Linapi, are
known to but few individuals, and must
be learned with much labor. Those obtained,
consist of 3 ancient songs relating
their traditions previous to arrival in America,
written in 24, 16 and 20 symbols,
altogether 60. They are very curious, but
destitute of chronology. The second series
relates to America, is comprised in 7 songs,
4 of 16 verses of 4 words, and 3 of 20 verses
of 3 words. It begins at the arrival in
America, and is continued without hardly
any interruption till the arrival of the European
colonists towards 1600. As 96
successive kings or chiefs are mentioned,
except ten that are nameless: it is susceptible
of being reduced to a chronology of
96 generations, forming 32 centuries, and
reaching back to 1600 years before our
era. But the whole is very meagre, a
simple catalogue of rulers, with a few
deeds: yet it is equal to the Mexican annals
of the same kind. A last song, which
has neither symbols nor words, consisting
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
in a mere translation, ends the whole, and
includes some few original details on the
period from 1600 to 1820.<note place='foot'>These actual
<foreign rend='italic'>Olum</foreign> were at first obtained
in 1820, as a reward for a medical
cure, deemed a curiosity; and were unexplicable.
In 1822 were obtained from another
individual the songs annexed thereto
in the original language; but no one could
be found by me able to translate them. I
had therefore to learn the language since,
by the help of Zeisberger, Hekewelder and
a manuscript dictionary, on purpose to
translate them, which I only accomplished
in 1833. The contents were totally unknown
to me in 1824, when I published my
Annals of Kentucky; which were based on
the traditions of Hekewelder, and those
collected by me on the Shawanis, Miamis,
Ottawas, &amp;c.</note>
</p>

<p>
The orthography of the Linapi names is
reduced to the Spanish and French pronunciation,
except SH as in English, U as
in French, W as Hou.
</p>

<p>
If any one is inclined to doubt this historical
account; the concurrent testimonies
of Loskiel and Heckewelder are my corroborant
proofs. The words of Loskiel
are these.
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The Delawares keep genealogies, with
the character of each man, if wise, rich,
renowned, or a mighty warrior. They
use <emph>hieroglyphs</emph> on wood, trees and stones,
to give caution, information, communicate
events, achievements, keep records. Some
time the hero has at his feet, men, heads
or weapons. They have also paintings
on skins of deeds, hunts, feats &amp;c.</q>
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Song.</hi>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>The Creation &amp;c.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1. At first there was nothing but sea-water
on the top of the land. <foreign rend='italic'>Aki.</foreign>
</p>

<p>
2. There was much water, and much fog
over the land, and there was also <hi rend='smallcaps'>Kitani-towit</hi>,
the God-creator.
</p>

<p>
3. And this God-creator was the first-being
(<foreign rend='italic'>Saye-wis</foreign>), an eternal being, and invisible
although every where.
</p>

<p>
4. It was he who caused much water,
much land, much cloud, much heaven.
</p>

<p>
5. It was he who caused the sun, the
moon and the stars.
</p>

<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>

<p>
6. And all these he caused to move
well.
</p>

<p>
7. By his action, it blew hard, it cleared
up, and the deep water ran off.
</p>

<p>
8. It looks bright, and islands stood
there.&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>Menak.</foreign>
</p>

<p>
9. It was then, when again the <emph>God-Creator</emph>
made the makers or spirits.&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>Manito-Manitoak.</foreign>
</p>

<p>
10. And also the first beings <foreign rend='italic'>Owiniwak</foreign>,
and also the angels <foreign rend='italic'>Angelatawiwak</foreign>, and
also the souls <foreign rend='italic'>Chichankwak</foreign>, all them he
made.<note place='foot'>This account of the creation is strikingly
similar to the mosaic and oriental
accounts; although it does not speak of
days or <foreign rend='italic'>Yums</foreign>.
The word for angels <foreign rend='italic'>Angelatawiwak</foreign>,
is not borrowed, but real
Linapi, put in the plural: thus the same
as the Greek <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Angelos</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
11. And afterwards he made the man-being
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jin-wis</hi>, ancestor of the
men.<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Jin-wis</foreign> is the
AISH or <foreign rend='italic'>Adam</foreign> of all
the Linapi tribes. W'IS is identic with
ISH, W' being the article <foreign rend='italic'>he</foreign>, WI added
to words is common, meaning but <hi rend='italic'>he</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>she</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>they</hi>, the plural <foreign rend='italic'>wak</foreign>
means <hi rend='italic'>many</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
12. He gave him the first mother <hi rend='smallcaps'>Neta-migaho</hi>,
mother of the first beings
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Owini</hi>.<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Owini</foreign>
may be analyzed O-WI-NI,
meaning <emph>such-they-men</emph> or beings. O is
the common article for pronouns <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>On</foreign>
and <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Ce</foreign>
of the French, in English <emph>such</emph>, <emph>it</emph>, <emph>this</emph>,
<emph>these</emph>,
preserved in many Linapi dialects, <foreign rend='italic'>Ni</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Ini</foreign> mean both
<emph>me</emph>, <emph>I</emph>, <emph>my</emph> and <emph>men</emph>. It must
be noticed that many words of these two
ancient songs are often obsolete now in
some modern dialects; but preserved in
others. This with the peculiar ancient
style, and the many words suppressed in
the narrative, and the constant compound
words, have rendered this translation a
difficult task.</note>
</p>

<p>
13. And fishes he gave him, turtles he
gave him, beasts he gave him, birds he gave
him.
</p>

<p>
14. But there was a bad spirit <foreign rend='italic'>Makimani</foreign>,
who caused the bad beings <foreign rend='italic'>Makowini</foreign>,
black snakes <foreign rend='italic'>Nakowak</foreign>, and monsters
or large reptiles <foreign rend='italic'>Amangamek</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
15. And caused also flies, and caused
also gnats.
</p>

<p>
16. All the beings were then friends and
stood there.
</p>

<p>
17. Thou being <hi rend='smallcaps'>Kiwis</hi>,
good God <hi rend='smallcaps'>Wunand</hi>
(these are 2 gods) and the good makers
or spirits were such.
</p>

<p>
18. With the Jins <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nijini</hi>, the first men,
and the first mother, their wives, which
were Fairies <foreign rend='italic'>Nantinewak</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Here
the <foreign rend='italic'>Owini</foreign> become
<foreign rend='italic'>Ni-jini</foreign>, evidently
the Jins of China and Iran; Jains
of India.</note>
</p>

<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>

<p>
19. The first food of the Jins and Fairies
was a fat fruit <foreign rend='italic'>Gattamin</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
20. All were willingly-pleased, all were
easy-thinking, and all were well-happified.
</p>

<p>
21. But after awhile a Snake-priest,
<foreign rend='italic'>Powako</foreign>, brings on earth secretly the
Snake worship <foreign rend='italic'>Initako</foreign>, of the god of the Snakes
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Wakon</hi>.<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Wakon</foreign>
is the god of all the Missouri
tribes, and many Asiatic nations. <foreign rend='italic'>Akon</foreign>
of Syria.</note>
</p>

<p>
22. And there came wickedness, crime
and unhappiness.
</p>

<p>
23. And bad weather was coming, distemper
was coming, with death was coming.
</p>

<p>
24. All this happened very long ago, at
the first land <foreign rend='italic'>Netamaki</foreign>, beyond the great
ocean <foreign rend='italic'>Kitahikan</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2d Song. The Flood &amp;c.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1. There was long ago a powerful snake
<foreign rend='italic'>Maskanako</foreign>, when the men had become
bad beings <foreign rend='italic'>Makowini</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
2. This strong snake had become the foe
of the Jins, and they became troubled, hating
each other.
</p>

<p>
3. Both were fighting, both were spoiling,
both were never peaceful.
</p>

<p>
4. And they were fighting, least man
<foreign rend='italic'>Mattapewi</foreign> with
dead-keeper <foreign rend='italic'>Nihanlowit</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
5. And the strong snake readily resolved
to destroy or fight the beings and the men.
</p>

<p>
6. The dark snake he brought, the monster
(<foreign rend='italic'>Amangam</foreign>) he brought, snake rushing-water
he brought.
</p>

<p>
7. Much water is rushing, much go to
hills, much penetrate, much destroying.
</p>

<p>
8. Meantime at <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tula</hi>, at that island,
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Nama-bush</hi> (the great hare
<foreign rend='italic'>Nana</foreign>) became
the ancestor of beings and men.
</p>

<p>
9. Being born creeping, he is ready to
move and dwell at
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tula</hi>.<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Tula</foreign> is
the ancient seat of the Toltecas
and Mexican nations in Asia: the
<foreign rend='italic'>Tulan</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Turan</foreign>
or Central Tartary. In
Linapi the meaning is <emph>Turtle</emph> or <emph>Tortoise</emph>,
names derived from <foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Thor</foreign> turtle in Hebrew.
But all derive from strong and tall. <foreign rend='italic'>Tul-ap-in</foreign>
is the real tortoise of Linapi meaning
<emph>strong-manly-thing</emph>: the water soft turtle
is called <foreign rend='italic'>Unami</foreign>. The Chinese, Hindus
&amp;c. point also to a turtle as the THBE
refuge of the flood. <foreign rend='italic'>Nana</foreign> appears Noah;
his title of Hare must allude to his long
ears? All the Linapi tribes have tales and
songs on Nana-bush, which they venerate
as a god; but his symbol is a turtle body
with a large head and nose, and a crest of
feathers or hair on the head.</note>
</p>

<p>
10. The beings and men (<foreign rend='italic'>Owini and
Linowi</foreign>) all go forth from the flood creeping
in shallow water, or swimming afloat,
asking which is the way to the turtle back
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tulapin</hi>. (This verse like many others
is in rhymes, and metre of 9 words of 3
syllables.)
</p>

<p>
11. But there were many monsters
(<foreign rend='italic'>Amangamek</foreign>) in the way, and some men
were devoured by them.
</p>

<p>
12. But the daughter of a spirit, helped
them in a boat, saying come, come, they
were coming and were helped. (The
name of the boat or raft is <foreign rend='italic'>Mokol</foreign>.)
</p>

<p>
13. Nanabush, Nanabush, became the
grandfather of all, the grandfather of the
beings, the grandfather of the men, and the
grandfather of the turtles. (This is the beginning
of a hymn to Nanabush, in rhymes,
lasting for 4 verses.)
</p>

<p>
14. The men were there, the turtle there,
they were turtling altogether. (<foreign rend='italic'>Tulapewi</foreign>
are the turtle-men.)
</p>

<p>
15. He was frightened, he the turtle, he
was praying, he the turtle, let it be to make
well.
</p>

<p>
16. Water running off, it is drying, in
the plains and the mountains, at the path
of the cave, elsewhere went the powerful
action or motion.
</p>

<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>3d Song. Fate after the Flood.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1. After the flood, the manly men <foreign rend='italic'>Linapewi</foreign>,
with the manly turtle beings dwelt
close together at the cave house, and dwelling
of <foreign rend='italic'>Talli</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
2. It freezes was there, it snows was
there, it is cold was there.
</p>

<p>
3. To possess mild coldness and much
game, they go to the northerly plain, to
hunt cattle they go.
</p>

<p>
4. To be strong and to be rich the comers
divided into tillers and hunters. <foreign rend='italic'>Wikhi-chik</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Elowi-chik</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
5. The most strong, the most good, the
most holy, the hunters they are.<note place='foot'>The symbol is a kind of Hercules,
with a club and arrow; his name appears
to be Eluwi, thrice repeated and meaning
<emph>the most he</emph>. <foreign rend='italic'>Elu</foreign> the root is probably akin
to the <foreign rend='italic'>Aleim</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign>
of Moses, and
<foreign lang='he' rend='italic'>Elai</foreign> meaning strong in Hebrew: also to
<foreign rend='italic'>Her-cules</foreign> of the Latins,
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Hera-cleen</foreign> of the
Greek, <foreign rend='italic'>Her</foreign> prefixed meaning Lord.</note>
</p>

<p>
6. And the hunters spread themselves,
becoming northerlings, easterlings, southerlings,
westerlings. <foreign rend='italic'>Lowaniwi</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Wapaniwi</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Shawaniwi</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Wunkeniwi</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
7. Thus the white country <foreign rend='italic'>Lumonaki</foreign>,
north of the turtle country, became the
hunting country of the turtling true men.
</p>

<p>
8. Meantime all the snakes were afraid
in their huts, and the snake priest <foreign rend='italic'>Nakopowa</foreign>
said to all, let us go.
</p>

<p>
9. Easterly they go forth at Snakeland
<foreign rend='italic'>Akhokink</foreign>, and they went away earnestly
grieving.
</p>

<p>
10. Thus escaping by going so far, and
by trembling the burnt land <foreign rend='italic'>Lusasaki</foreign> is
torn and is broken from the snake fortified
land. <foreign rend='italic'>Akomenaki</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
11. Being free, having no trouble, the
northerlings all go out, separating, at the
land of Snow <foreign rend='italic'>Winiaken</foreign>.
</p>

<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>

<p>
12. The fish resort to the shores of the
gaping sea, where tarried the fathers of
white eagle and white wolf. <foreign rend='italic'>Waplanewa</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Waptumewi</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
13. While our fathers were always boating
and navigating, they saw in the east
that the snake land was bright and wealthy.
(Here begins a fine poetical rhyming narrative).&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>See
Last Note.</hi>
</p>

<p>
14. The head-beaver <foreign rend='italic'>Wihlamok</foreign>, and
the big-bird <foreign rend='italic'>Kicholen</foreign>, were saying to all,
let us go to the Snake Island <foreign rend='italic'>Akomen</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
15. By going with us, we shall annihilate
all the snaking people, <foreign rend='italic'>Wemaken</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
16. Having all agreed, the northerlings
and easterlings, went over the water of the
frozen sea to possess that land.
</p>

<p>
17. It was wonderful when they all went
over the smooth deep water of the frozen sea,
at the gap of the Snake sea in the great ocean.
</p>

<p>
18. They were ten thousand in the dark,
who all go forth in a single night in the
dark, to the Snake island of the eastern
land <foreign rend='italic'>Wapanaki</foreign> in the Dark, by walking
all the people.&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Olini.</hi><note place='foot'>Here
the people begin to be called
<hi rend='smallcaps'>O-lini</hi>, this was probably their old name
when coming to America. The tribes that
used R for L must have said <foreign rend='italic'>O-rini</foreign>, those
who have neither, as the Niniwas and
Ottawas, say <foreign rend='italic'>O-nini</foreign>. This will afford
matter for many philological enquiries and
comparisons.</note>
</p>

<p>
19. They were the manly north, the manly
east, the manly south; with manly eagle,
manly beaver, manly wolf; with manly
hunter, manly priest, manly rich; with
manly wife, manly daughter, manly dog.
(12 words all homophonous rhymes.)
</p>

<p>
20. All coming there, they tarry at Firland
<foreign rend='italic'>Shinaking</foreign>. But the western men
doubtful of the passage, preferred to remain
at the old turtle land.
</p>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<p>
Thus end these interesting and positive
ancient traditions, by a fine poem on the
passage to America over the ice; the Shawanis
have a similar poem: the Illinois had
also one, and almost every Linapi tribe.
They are perhaps lost; but this being at
last rescued, will preserve the memory for
ever. Now begin the second series of
songs, in a different style, seldom rhyming,
but made metrical by an equal number of
words in each verse, 4 in the 4 first which
carry the tribe till their conquest of the
<foreign rend='italic'>Talegas</foreign>; but only 3 in the 3 later poems
on the subsequent history. Thus these
songs diminish in details as they advance;
but they are mere abridgment of better
annals now probably lost. Numbers shall
be annexed to each successive king or
ruler, so as to compute the generations.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Song. At Shinaki till the 10 Kings
or Civil Wars.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1. Long ago, the fathers of men were
then at <foreign rend='italic'>Shinaki</foreign> or Firland.
</p>

<p>
2. The path leader was the white eagle
(<foreign rend='italic'>Wapalanewa 1</foreign>), who leads them all there.
</p>

<p>
3. The Snake island was a big land, a
fine land, and was explored by them.
</p>

<p>
4. The friendly souls, the hunting souls,
the moving souls, in assembly meet.
</p>

<p>
5. All say to him, beautiful-head (<foreign rend='italic'>Kolawil
2</foreign>) be thou king there.
</p>

<p>
6. The snakes are coming, thou killest
some, to Snake hill, let them all go.
</p>

<p>
7. All the snakes were quite weak, and
concealing themselves at the Bear hill.
</p>

<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>

<p>
8. After Kolawil, white owl (<foreign rend='italic'>Wapagokhos</foreign>
3) was king at the Firland.
</p>

<p>
9. After him there <foreign rend='italic'>Ianotowi</foreign> (4 true
maker) was king, and many things he did.
</p>

<p>
10. After him there <foreign rend='italic'>Chilili</foreign> (5 snowbird)
was king, who says let us go south.
</p>

<p>
11. To spread the fathers of men <foreign rend='italic'>Wokenapi</foreign>,
and to be able to possess much
more.<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>W'oken-api</foreign>
properly mean <emph>the fathers
manly</emph>. <foreign rend='italic'>Shinaki</foreign> the first seat in
America must have been near Alaska, and
the big <foreign rend='italic'>Shinaki</foreign>, the N. W. coast.</note>
</p>

<p>
12. South he goes the snowbird, but east
he goes the beaver-he <foreign rend='italic'>Tamakwi</foreign>. (Here
is the separation of the Dinnis.)
</p>

<p>
13. A beautiful land was the south land,
the big Firland and the shoreland <foreign rend='italic'>Shabi-yaki</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
14. But the eastern land was a fish land,
and a lake land, and a cattle land.
</p>

<p>
15. After Chilili, the great warrior (<foreign rend='italic'>Ayamek</foreign>
6) was king, when all the tribes were
at war.
</p>

<p>
16. There was war with the robbing-men,
snaking-men, blacking men, strongmen.
<foreign rend='italic'>Chikonapi</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Akhonapi</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Makatapi</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Assinapi</foreign>.&mdash;Thus ends the first song with
civil strife and great wars, dividing some
tribes probably.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2d Song. From the 10 Kings till the
Missouri &amp;c.</hi>
</p>

<p>
17. After Ayamek came ten kings, in
whose time there was much warfare south
and east.<note place='foot'>It is doubtful whether these 10 nameless
kings were successive or contemporary
during the civil strifes. But the first is most
probable. If otherwise, this lessens the
generations.</note>
</p>

<p>
18. After them <foreign rend='italic'>Langundowi</foreign> (peaceful-he,
17 kg.) was king at the beautiful land
<foreign rend='italic'>Akolaking</foreign>, and there was peace.<note place='foot'>This
southern land of <foreign rend='italic'>Akolaking</foreign>,
and the subsequent <foreign rend='italic'>Minihaking</foreign>, cannot
be identified; but were west of Oregon
mountains, probably the Oregon country.</note>
</p>

<p>
19. After such <foreign rend='italic'>Tasukamend</foreign> (never-bad
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
18) was king, and he was a good or just
man.
</p>

<p>
20. After such was king <foreign rend='italic'>Pemaholend</foreign>
(ever beloved 19) who did much good.
</p>

<p>
21. King afterwards was <foreign rend='italic'>Matemik</foreign> (town
builder 20) who built many towns, and
afterwards the holy goer <foreign rend='italic'>Pilsohalin</foreign> 21.
</p>

<p>
22. King afterwards was <foreign rend='italic'>Gunokeni</foreign>
(long while fatherly 22, who ruled long) and
afterwards the big teeth <foreign rend='italic'>Mangipitak</foreign> 23.
</p>

<p>
23. King afterwards was <foreign rend='italic'>Olumapi</foreign> (24
manly recorder or bundler) who caused
many writings.<note place='foot'>As early as 72 generations before
1600 or about 800 years before our era, we
find a recorder of old events, by means of
<foreign rend='italic'>Olum</foreign>. Compare
<foreign rend='italic'>Olen</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>Olam</foreign>
of Celts.</note>
</p>

<p>
24. King afterwards was <foreign rend='italic'>Takwachi</foreign> (25
who shivers with cold) who went south to
the corn land <foreign rend='italic'>Minihaking</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
25. King afterwards was <foreign rend='italic'>Huminiend</foreign>
(26 corn eater) who planted much corn
there.
</p>

<p>
26. King afterwards was <foreign rend='italic'>Alkosahit</foreign> (27
preserving keeper) who had a royal soul
and was very useful.
</p>

<p>
27. King afterwards was <foreign rend='italic'>Shiwapi</foreign> (28
salt man) and afterwards dry-he <foreign rend='italic'>Penkwonwi</foreign>
29.
</p>

<p>
28. There was no raining, and no corn
grew, east he goes far from the sea.<note place='foot'>Here this people leave at last the
Sea shores, and strike to the east over the
mountains. In <foreign rend='italic'>Oligon</foreign>, we have the etymology
of Oregon.</note>
</p>

<p>
29. Over hollow mountain <foreign rend='italic'>Oligonunk</foreign>,
at last to eat he went at a fine plain <foreign rend='italic'>Kalok-waming</foreign>
of the cattle land.
</p>

<p>
30. After <foreign rend='italic'>Penkwonwi</foreign> came
<foreign rend='italic'>Wekwo-chella</foreign>
(30 much weary) after such the stiff
(<foreign rend='italic'>Chingalsuwi</foreign> 31.)
</p>

<p>
31. After such was <foreign rend='italic'>Kwitikwund</foreign> (32 the
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
reprover) who was disliked, and some unwilling
to obey.
</p>

<p>
32. Being angry some moved easterly,
and secretly went far off.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>3d Song. From the Missouri to the
Mississippi &amp;c.</hi>
</p>

<p>
33. But the wise did tarry, and <foreign rend='italic'>Waka-holend</foreign>
(33 the beloved) was made king.
</p>

<p>
34. It was at the Yellow River <foreign rend='italic'>Wisawana</foreign>
where there was much corn, large
meadows, and again were built
towns.<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Wisawana</foreign> is either the Missouri or
Yellowstone.</note>
</p>

<p>
35. All being friends <foreign rend='italic'>Tamenend</foreign> (34
affable like a beaver) became king and was
alone the first.<note place='foot'>This
<foreign rend='italic'>Tamenend</foreign> is famous in the
songs of the Linapis, and many kings took
that title afterwards. He is also the <foreign rend='italic'>Amik-wi</foreign>
or great beaver of the Miamis and
Ottawas.</note>
</p>

<p>
36. Such Tamenend was the very best,
and all the men came to him.
</p>

<p>
37. After such good <foreign rend='italic'>Maskansisil</foreign> (35
strong buffaloe) was king and chieftain or
leader.
</p>

<p>
38. <foreign rend='italic'>Machigokhos</foreign> (36 big-owl) was king,
<foreign rend='italic'>Wapkicholen</foreign> (37 white crane) was king.
</p>

<p>
39. <foreign rend='italic'>Wingenund</foreign> (38 mindful) was king
and pontiff, who made many festivals.<note place='foot'>Wingenund must have been another
legislator, and high-priest. His festivals
are called <foreign rend='italic'>Gentiko</foreign>, and known to many
nations.</note>
</p>

<p>
40. <foreign rend='italic'>Lapawin</foreign> (whitened 39) was king,
<foreign rend='italic'>Wallama</foreign> (40 painted) was king.
</p>

<p>
41. <foreign rend='italic'>Waptiwapit</foreign> (41 white chicken) was
king, again there is war north and south.
</p>

<p>
42. By the wise in assembly <foreign rend='italic'>Tamaskan</foreign>
(strong wolf 42) was made king.
</p>

<p>
43. He was able to war on all and he
killed the strong-stone
<foreign rend='italic'>Maskansini</foreign>.<note place='foot'><foreign
rend='italic'>Maskan-Sini</foreign>, must be the Sioux and
Assinis, called stony or hard people throughout
North America. The subsequent foes
<foreign rend='italic'>Akowini</foreign> appear to
be the <foreign rend='italic'>Kowetas</foreign>, the
<foreign rend='italic'>Lowanuski</foreign> are
the Esquimaux, <foreign rend='italic'>Lowakon</foreign>
are the Ozages and Missouri tribes. Thus
this was a period of invasions by many nations,
which compelled the Linapis to go
further east.</note>
</p>

<p>
44. <foreign rend='italic'>Messissuwi</foreign> (43 whole-he) was king
and made war on the snake-beings <foreign rend='italic'>Akowini</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
45. <foreign rend='italic'>Chitanwulit</foreign> (44 strong and good)
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
was king and made war on the northern
foes <foreign rend='italic'>Lowanuski</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
46. <foreign rend='italic'>Alokuwi</foreign> (45 lean he) was king and
made war on the father snake <foreign rend='italic'>Towakon</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
47. <foreign rend='italic'>Opekasit</foreign> (46 east-looking) was king,
being sad at the warfare.
</p>

<p>
48. To the sunrise he said let us go, and
they are many who together go east.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>4th Song. Conquest of the Talegas &amp;c.</hi>
</p>

<p>
49. The fish river <foreign rend='italic'>Nemasipi</foreign> separated
the land, and being lazy they tarry there.<note place='foot'><p>The
Nemasipi is the Mississippi, so
says Hekewelder: where began the wars
with the <foreign rend='italic'>Talegas</foreign>, the northern Toltecas
or Atlantes, towards 48 generations before
1600, near the beginning of our era, which
continued for 4 generations or over 130
years, till about 150 after Christ. The
allies Talamatans are the Hurons and Iroquois
then united, since called <foreign rend='italic'>Delamatan</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Lamatan</foreign>. The traditions of Hekewelder
and Cusick both agree here in fact
and time. That of Hekewelder is most
ample, taken from other songs; but these
supply names omitted by both. I rather
think the Nemosipi must have been the
Ozages or Illinois river, since the Mississippi
is called afterwards Masispek, and the
monuments of the Talegas are found west
of it at St. Louis &amp;c.
</p>
<p>
In my ancient history of Kentucky, having
only for guide Hekewelder and some
other traditions, I placed the conquest of
the Talegas about 500 of our era; but
these annals are more correct and remove
further this event. The computation of
Cusick annals of Ongwis place this great
event still earlier, or between 300 and 100
years before our era. I knew neither Cusick
nor the Wallam-Olum in 1824.</p></note>
</p>

<p>
50. <foreign rend='italic'>Yagawanend</foreign> (47 hut maker) was
king, and the <foreign rend='italic'>Tallegewi</foreign> (there found) possessing
the east.
</p>

<p>
51. <foreign rend='italic'>Chitanitis</foreign> (48 strong friend) king
was, and he desires the rich land of the
east.
</p>

<p>
52. To the east some did pass, but the
head of the Talegas, <foreign rend='italic'>Talegawil</foreign> killed some
of them.
</p>

<p>
53. Then of one mind, all say, warfare,
warfare.
</p>

<p>
54. The friends of the north the <foreign rend='italic'>Talamatan</foreign>
(who are not like the Talligewi,
the Hurons) were coming to go altogether
united.
</p>

<p>
55. <foreign rend='italic'>Kinehepend</foreign> (49 sharp looking) was
king, and leader, over the river against foes.
</p>

<p>
56. Much was there possessed by them,
and much spoiling and killing of the Talegas.
</p>

<p>
57. <foreign rend='italic'>Pimokhasuwi</foreign> (50 stirring about) was
king, but he found the Talegas too strong
in the war.
</p>

<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>

<p>
58. <foreign rend='italic'>Tenchekensit</foreign> (51 opening path) was
king, and many towns were given up to him.
</p>

<p>
59. <foreign rend='italic'>Paganchihilla</foreign> (52 great fulfiller)
was king, and all the Talegas went away
to the south.
</p>

<p>
60. <foreign rend='italic'>Hattanwulaton</foreign> (53 he has possession)
was king, and all the people were well
pleased.
</p>

<p>
61. South of the lakes they settle the
council fire, and the friends <foreign rend='italic'>Talamatan</foreign>
north of the lakes.
</p>

<p>
62. But they were not always friends
and were conspiring when <foreign rend='italic'>Gunitakan</foreign> (54
long mild) was king.
</p>

<p>
63. <foreign rend='italic'>Linniwulamen</foreign> (55 man of truth)
was king, and made war on the Talamatan.
</p>

<p>
64. <foreign rend='italic'>Shakagapewi</foreign> (56 just and upright)
was king, and the Talamatan were trembling.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Second Series or Modern History.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>1st Song. At the Talega land.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1. All were peaceful long ago there at
the Talega land <foreign rend='italic'>Talegaking</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
2. <foreign rend='italic'>Tamaganend</foreign> (57 beaver leader) was
king at the White River or <foreign rend='italic'>Wabash Wa-palaneng</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
3. <foreign rend='italic'>Wapushuwi</foreign> (58 white linx) was king
and planted much corn.
</p>

<p>
4. <foreign rend='italic'>Wulichinik</foreign> (59 well hardy) was king,
and the people increased.
</p>

<p>
5. <foreign rend='italic'>Lekhihitin</foreign> (60. writer writing) was
king and painted many books
<foreign rend='italic'>Wallamo-lumin</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Here
we find another recorder of
events who probably wrote the former wars
with the Talegas.</note>
</p>

<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>

<p>
6. <foreign rend='italic'>Kolachuisen</foreign> (61 pretty blue bird) was
king, at the place of much fruit <foreign rend='italic'>Makeli-ming</foreign>.
(near Cincinnati?)
</p>

<p>
7. <foreign rend='italic'>Pematalli</foreign> (62 constant there) was
king and had many towns.
</p>

<p>
8. <foreign rend='italic'>Pepomahemen</foreign> (63 paddler up) was
king of many rivers and streams.
</p>

<p>
9. <foreign rend='italic'>Tankawon</foreign> (64 little cloud) was king,
while many went away.
</p>

<p>
10. The Nentegos and the Shawanis,
went to the south lands.<note place='foot'>The Linapi tribes begin to disperse
now, about 600 years of our era.</note>
</p>

<p>
11. <foreign rend='italic'>Kichitamak</foreign> (65 big beaver) was
king at the white lick <foreign rend='italic'>Wapahoning</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
12. The heavenly prophet <foreign rend='italic'>Onowutok</foreign>
(66) went to the west.<note place='foot'>This prophet, pontiff and king, went
probably to visit many tribes, and became
their legislator.</note>
</p>

<p>
13. The west he visited, the forsaken
land and the western southerlings.
</p>

<p>
14. <foreign rend='italic'>Pawanami</foreign> (67 rich water turtle)
was king at the Ohio River <foreign rend='italic'>Taleganah</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
15. <foreign rend='italic'>Lokwelend</foreign> (68 walker) was king,
and had much warfare.<note place='foot'>These new wars were again with
the Missouri tribes, <foreign rend='italic'>Lowako</foreign> is a new invading
tribe from the north.</note>
</p>

<p>
16. Again with the father snake <foreign rend='italic'>Towako</foreign>,
again with the stony snake <foreign rend='italic'>Sinako</foreign>, again
with north snake <foreign rend='italic'>Lowako</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
17. <foreign rend='italic'>Mokolmokom</foreign> (69 the grand father
of the boats) was king and went snaking
in boats.
</p>

<p>
18. <foreign rend='italic'>Winelowich</foreign> (70 snow hunter) was
king and went to the north land of the Esquimaux
<foreign rend='italic'>Lowushkis</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
19. <foreign rend='italic'>Linkwekinuk</foreign> (71 sharp looker) was
king and went to the Alleghany Mountains
<foreign rend='italic'>Talegachukang</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
20. <foreign rend='italic'>Wapalawikwan</foreign> (72 east settler)
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
was king and went east of the Talega
land.<note place='foot'>The passage of the Alleghanies was
towards 800 of our era: the atlantic states
appear to have had no inhabitants, or but
few. Hekewelder confirms these facts.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2d Song. At the East till first White
Man comes.</hi>
</p>

<p>
21. This land of the east, was a large
land <foreign rend='italic'>Amangaki</foreign>, and
a long land <foreign rend='italic'>Amigaki</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
22. This land had no snakes, but was
a rich land, and many good things were
found there.
</p>

<p>
23. <foreign rend='italic'>Gikenopalat</foreign> (73 great warrior) was
king near the north.
</p>

<p>
24. <foreign rend='italic'>Hanaholend</foreign> (74 stream loving) was
king at the branching stream or Susquehanna
<foreign rend='italic'>Saskwihanang</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Hekewelder
has given no etymology
of this river, the name means either branching
or roaring stream, perhaps both. <foreign rend='italic'>Winaki</foreign>
was the name of east Pennsylvania.</note>
</p>

<p>
25. <foreign rend='italic'>Gattawisi</foreign> (75 becoming fat) was
king at the sassafras land <foreign rend='italic'>Winaki</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
26. All the hunters reach the Salt Sea of
the sun <foreign rend='italic'>Gishikshapipek</foreign>, which was again
a big sea.
</p>

<p>
27. <foreign rend='italic'>Makhiawip</foreign> (76 red arrow) was
king at the tide water.
</p>

<p>
28. <foreign rend='italic'>Wolomenap</foreign> (77 hollow man) was
king at the strong falls (of Trenton) <foreign rend='italic'>Mas-kekitong</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
29. The <foreign rend='italic'>Wapanand</foreign> (ensters) and the
<foreign rend='italic'>Tumewand</foreign> (wolfers or Mohigans) north-east
they go.<note place='foot'><p>By this account the Mohigans only
separated towards 970 from the main body.
This may be inaccurate, as the north-east
tribes appear older by their traditions.
</p>
<p>
By the account given by the missionary
Beatty in 1766, this event would be still
later: he states that after separating from
the western tribes and long wanderings, the
Lenaps (Linapis) settled on the river Delaware
370 years before 1766, or in 1396;
which was preserved in a mosaic belt.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>See
Moulton's Hist. of New-York, Vol I.</hi></p></note>
</p>

<p>
30. <foreign rend='italic'>Wulitpallat</foreign> (78 good fighter) was
king and set against the north.
</p>

<p>
31. The <foreign rend='italic'>Maliongwi</foreign> (lickers or Iroquois)
and the <foreign rend='italic'>Pungelika</foreign> (the lynx like or Eries)
were all trembling there.
</p>

<p>
32. Again <foreign rend='italic'>Tamenend</foreign> (79 beaver II) was
king there, and with all he made peace.
</p>

<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>

<p>
33. And all became friendly, and all became
united, with this great ruling king.<note place='foot'>This is the second Tamenend who
united all the tribes 1010. This famous
name is spelt very variously <foreign rend='italic'>Tamanend</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Tamany</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Tamini</foreign>
&amp;c. all meaning beavering
or acting like a beaver. There are
many songs and traditions on them.</note>
</p>

<p>
34. <foreign rend='italic'>Kichitamak</foreign> (80 great beaver) was
king and remains at the sassafras land or
Pennsylvania.
</p>

<p>
37. <foreign rend='italic'>Wapahakey</foreign> (81 white body) was
king and went to the Sea Shore on Jersey
<foreign rend='italic'>Sheyabi</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
38. <foreign rend='italic'>Elangomel</foreign> (82 friendly to all) was
king and much good was done.
</p>

<p>
39. <foreign rend='italic'>Pitenumen</foreign> (83 mistaker) was king,
and saw some one come from somewhere.
</p>

<p>
40. At this time from the east sea was
coming a whiter <foreign rend='italic'>Wapsi</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Here
is the first mention of white
men towards 1170 by the computation of
generations: whether they were Eric or
Madoc, or both, will be enquired hereafter.
The Tuscororas of North Carolina were
visited at the same time by Cusick tradition,
the Mohigans had also their <foreign rend='italic'>Wach-queow</foreign>.
Hekewelder has omitted this
tradition like many others. But Holm in
his description of New Sweden positively
gives two traditions of the Linapis, tribe
Renapis, of a <emph>white woman</emph> who came to
America, married an American, had a son,
who went to heaven; and of 2 bigmouths (or
preachers) who came afterwards with long
beards, and also went to heaven. This
relates to the bishop Eric who went to
convert the Americans between 1120 and
1160, rather than Madoc or a warlike band.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>3d Song. Till the arrival of Colonies.</hi>
</p>

<p>
41. <foreign rend='italic'>Makelomush</foreign> (84 much honored) was
king and made all happy.
</p>

<p>
42. <foreign rend='italic'>Wulakeningus</foreign> (85 well praised) was
king and became a warrior of the south.
</p>

<p>
43. He must make war on the Cheroki
Snakes <foreign rend='italic'>Otaliwako</foreign>, and on the Coweta
Snakes <foreign rend='italic'>Akowetako</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
44. <foreign rend='italic'>Wapagamoshki</foreign> (86 white otter) was
king, ally of the <foreign rend='italic'>Lamatan</foreign> or Hurons.
</p>

<p>
45. <foreign rend='italic'>Wapashum</foreign> (87 white big horn) was
king and visited the west land of Talega.
</p>

<p>
46. There he found the Illinois <foreign rend='italic'>Hiliniki</foreign>,
the Shawanis <foreign rend='italic'>Shawoniki</foreign>, and the Conoys
<foreign rend='italic'>Konowiki</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
47. <foreign rend='italic'>Nitispayat</foreign> (88 friendly comer) was
king, and he went to the big lakes.
</p>

<p>
48. And he visited all the beaver-children
or Miamis, and all the friends or allies.<note place='foot'>The
Miamis or M'amiwis were descendants
of the first beaver tribe, separated
long before.</note>
</p>

<p>
49. <foreign rend='italic'>Pakimitzin</foreign> (89 cranberry eater)
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
was king, and made alliance with the
Ottawas, <foreign rend='italic'>Tawa</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
50. <foreign rend='italic'>Lowaponskan</foreign> (90 north walker) was
king, and he visited the noisy place or
Niagara <foreign rend='italic'>Ganshowenik</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
51. <foreign rend='italic'>Tashawinso</foreign> (91 at leisure gatherer)
was king, and visited the Sea shores.
</p>

<p>
52. Then the offspring, in three desiring,
three to be, and they became the Turtle
tribe, the Wolf tribe, and the Turkey tribe.
<foreign rend='italic'>Unamini</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Minsimini</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Chikimini</foreign>.<note place='foot'>This
verse is double, or has 2 symbols
with 6 words, appearing to be two
different readings united, or two modes of
expressing the same thing, the separation
of the real Linapis into three tribes.</note>
</p>

<p>
53. <foreign rend='italic'>Epallahchund</foreign> (92 failer) was king,
in the war with the <foreign rend='italic'>Mahongwi</foreign>, wherein
he fails.<note place='foot'>This may allude to the subjection of
the Linapis, by the <foreign rend='italic'>Mahongwis</foreign> (Mengwi
or Iroquois) about this time, caused by the
division of the tribes. The name of failer
is certainly an epithet or nickname given:
most of the names of kings appear of the
same kind or titles. We know they changed
names when becoming kings or after great
deeds.</note>
</p>

<p>
54. <foreign rend='italic'>Langomuwi</foreign> (93 friendly he) was
king and the Mahongwi were frightened.
</p>

<p>
55. <foreign rend='italic'>Wangomend</foreign> (94 saluted) was king
yonder between.
</p>

<p>
56. The Cherokis <foreign rend='italic'>Otaliwi</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Wasio-towi</foreign>
(those of the Otali and Wasioto mts.)
were his foes.<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Otali</foreign>
is the real name of the Cheroki
mountaineers, so says Adair: this recalls
the Talegas to mind, of whom they may be
a fragment. The <foreign rend='italic'>Wasioto</foreign> are the Cumberland
mountains, meaning the <foreign rend='italic'>South
Sioto</foreign>. The <foreign rend='italic'>Siotos</foreign> were a Missouri tribe
that advanced as far as the <foreign rend='italic'>Sioto</foreign> river in
Ohio, gave name to it, and were expelled
by the Ottawas; probably akin to the <foreign rend='italic'>Otos</foreign>
of Missouri. They bear the snake sign in
the symbol.</note>
</p>

<p>
57. <foreign rend='italic'>Wapachikis</foreign> (95 white crab) was
king and ally a friend of Jersey on the
shores.
</p>

<p>
58. <foreign rend='italic'>Nenachihat</foreign> (96 watcher) was king
and looking at the sea.
</p>

<p>
59. At this time north and south the
<foreign rend='italic'>Wapayachik</foreign> came, the white or eastern
moving souls.
</p>

<p>
60. They were friendly, and came in big
bird-ships, who are they?<note place='foot'>The symbolic glyph for this event is
nearly the same as for the arrival of <foreign rend='italic'>Wapsi</foreign>
or Eric. A sea, a boat, with mast, sail,
and cross over it. Every nation is denoted
by a peculiar sign on the head in these annals.
1. <foreign rend='italic'>Jinwis</foreign> and his wife by an aureole,
2. the <foreign rend='italic'>Ako</foreign> or snakes by a forked tongue
or 2 horns, 3. the <foreign rend='italic'>Jins</foreign> by a crown of rays,
4. the <foreign rend='italic'>Owinis</foreign> by a feather, 5. the kings by
3 feathers, the medial longer, 6. the Esquimaux
by a T, 7. the Talamatans by the
same reversed T, 8. the Talegas by a bar
pointing to the right, 9. the Nentegos by a
hook, 10. the Europeans by a cross. This
evinces a kind of systematic symbolic plan,
like the Mexican; but the symbols are very
seldom similar.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thus end these poetical annals, so curious
and so plain, when properly understood
and translated. The following addition
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
is merely a fragment on the subsequent
period, translated by John Burns. I give
it as received although I fear it is inaccurate
in some respects, and a paraphrase
rather than literal account. Yet by this
addition, we obtain a kind of general history
of at least one American tribe, and a
complete original series of traditions, in
their peculiar pristine style. Many others
will be added hereafter, either from printed
traditions, or historical songs and fragments.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fragment on the history of the Linapis
from about 1600 till 1820.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1. Alas, alas! we know now who they
are, these <foreign rend='italic'>Wapsinis</foreign> (white people) who
then came out of the sea, to rob us of our
country. Starving wretches! with smiles
they came; but soon became snaking foes.
</p>

<p>
2. The <foreign rend='italic'>Wallamolum</foreign>
was written by <foreign rend='italic'>Lekhibit</foreign>
(the writer) to record our glory. Shall
I write another to record our fall? No! our
foes have taken care to do it; but I speak
to thee what they know not or conceal.
</p>

<p>
3. We have had many other kings since
that unhappy time. They were 3 till the
friendly <foreign rend='italic'>Mikwon</foreign> (Penn)
came. <foreign rend='italic'>Mattanikum</foreign>
(not horned, not strong),<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Mattanikum</foreign>
appears to be both the <foreign rend='italic'>Tinikum</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Mattahorn</foreign> of the Swedes
and Holm. Horn is not a Linapi word,
but Swedish, so as to translate half the
name. He was king in 1645.</note>
when the <foreign rend='italic'>Winakoli</foreign><note place='foot'>Holm
says the Renapis called the
Swedes, Akhoures, which in dialect Linapi
would be <foreign rend='italic'>Akoli</foreign>,
meaning <emph>ugly</emph> or <emph>snake-looking</emph>;
the prefix <foreign rend='italic'>Win</foreign>, means either <emph>the
beings</emph> or snow, or may refer to Winaki.</note>
came to <foreign rend='italic'>Winaki</foreign>.
<foreign rend='italic'>Nahumen</foreign> (raccoon)
when the <foreign rend='italic'>Sinalwi</foreign> (Dutch) came. And
<foreign rend='italic'>Ikwahon</foreign> (fond of women)
when the <foreign rend='italic'>Yankwis</foreign>
(English) came, with Mikwon and his
friends soon after.
</p>

<p>
4. They were all received and fed with
corn; but no land was ever sold, we never
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
sell any. They were all allowed to dwell
with us, to build houses and plant corn, as
our friends and allies. Because they were
hungry, and thought children of <foreign rend='italic'>Gishaki</foreign>
(the sun land) and not snakes nor children
of snakes.<note place='foot'>The assertion that no land was ever
sold to the colonists is singular. They
thought to buy land with trifling presents;
but the natives understood all the while the
permission to dwell with them.</note>
</p>

<p>
5. And they were traders, bringing fine
new tools, and weapons, and cloth, and
beads, for which we exchanged skins and
shells and corn. And we liked them, with
their things, because we thought they were
good, and made by the children of <foreign rend='italic'>Gishaki</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
6. But alas! they brought also fire guns
and fire waters, which burned and killed.
Also baubles and trinkets of no use; since
we had better ones.
</p>

<p>
7. And after Mikwon, came the children
of <foreign rend='italic'>Dolojo-Sakima</foreign> (King George) who
said, more land, more land we must have,
and no limit could be put to their steps and
increase.
</p>

<p>
8. But in the north were the children of
<foreign rend='italic'>Lowi-Sakima</foreign>, (King Louis), who were
our good friends, allies of our allies, foes of
our foes: yet <foreign rend='italic'>Dolojo</foreign> always wanted to war
with them.
</p>

<p>
9. We had 3 kings after <foreign rend='italic'>Mikwon</foreign> came.
<foreign rend='italic'>Skalichi</foreign> who was another
<foreign rend='italic'>Tamenend</foreign>,<note place='foot'>This
is a third Tamanend, the great
king of the whole nation dwelling at the
forks of the Delaware, which appears in
Penn's treaties, and came in great pomp in
1697. The other chiefs mentioned in deeds,
were only his vassals: he is also called
Taminy; but is very different from <foreign rend='italic'>Tatami</foreign>
who was king till 1748 at Welakamika or
Nazareth, where he was killed by an Irish
settler. Hekewelder mentions him; but
has many blunders on Tamanend, having
mixt the three into one.</note>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Sasunam Wikwikhon</foreign> (our uncle the
builder), and <foreign rend='italic'>Tatami</foreign> (the beaver taker)
who was killed by a <foreign rend='italic'>Yankwako</foreign> (English
snake), and we vowed revenge.
</p>

<p>
10. <foreign rend='italic'>Netatawis</foreign> (first renewed being)
became king of all the nations in the west,
again at <foreign rend='italic'>Talligewink</foreign> (Ohio or the Talega
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
place) on the river Cayahaga, with our old
allies the <foreign rend='italic'>Talamatans</foreign>: and he called on
all of the east.
</p>

<p>
11. But <foreign rend='italic'>Tadeskung</foreign> was chief in the east
at <foreign rend='italic'>Mahoning</foreign> and
bribed by the <foreign rend='italic'>Yankwis</foreign>:
there he was burnt in his house, and many
of our people were massacred at <foreign rend='italic'>Hickory</foreign>
(Lancaster) by the land robbers <foreign rend='italic'>Yankwis</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
12. Then we joined our friend <foreign rend='italic'>Lowi</foreign> in
war against the Yankwis; but they were
strong, and they took <foreign rend='italic'>Lowanaki</foreign> (north
land, Canada) from Lowi, and came to us
in <foreign rend='italic'>Talegawink</foreign>, when peace was made;
and we called them big knives <foreign rend='italic'>Kichikani</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
13. Then <foreign rend='italic'>Alimi</foreign> (white-eyes) and
<foreign rend='italic'>Gelelenund</foreign>
(buck killer) were chiefs, and all
the nations near us were allies under us as
our grandchildren again.<note place='foot'>Netawatwis was king in the west
from 1748 till 1776. Alimi or Coquetha-gekton
(Heck.) was regent of his grandson
<foreign rend='italic'>Unamiwi</foreign> till 1780, after him Gelelelund
was regent till 1782 when the boy <foreign rend='italic'>Unamiwi</foreign>
was killed by the Bigknives.&mdash;(Heck.) this
was the cause of the wars till 1795.</note>
</p>

<p>
14. When the eastern fires were set up,
and began to resist Dolojo, they said we
should be another fire with them. But
they killed our chiefs <foreign rend='italic'>Unamiwi</foreign> (turtling)
and our brothers on the Muskingum. Then
<foreign rend='italic'>Hopokan</foreign> (strong pipe) of the Wolf tribe
was made king, and he made war on the
<foreign rend='italic'>Kichikani Yankwis</foreign>, and become the ally
of Dolojo who was then very strong.
</p>

<p>
15. But the eastern fires were stronger,
they did not take <foreign rend='italic'>Lowanaki</foreign> (Canada) but
become free from <foreign rend='italic'>Dolojo</foreign>. We went to
<foreign rend='italic'>Wapahani</foreign> (white river) to be further from
them; but they follow every where, and
we made war on them, till they sent <foreign rend='italic'>Makhiakho</foreign>
(black snake, General Wayne) who
made strong war.<note place='foot'>General Wayne was compared to
their old foes, and called Black Snake, because
he beat the allied nations.</note>
</p>

<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>

<p>
16. We made peace and settle limits.
Our next king was <foreign rend='italic'>Hacking-Ponskan</foreign>
(hard walker) who was good and peaceful.
He would not even join our brothers Shawanis
and Ottawas, nor Dolojo in the next
war.
</p>

<p>
17. Yet after the last peace, the <foreign rend='italic'>Kichikani-Yankwis</foreign>
came in crowds all around
us, and they want also our lands of <foreign rend='italic'>Wapahani</foreign>.
It was useless to resist, because
they are getting stronger by increasing
united fires.
</p>

<p>
18. <foreign rend='italic'>Kithtilkund</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Lapanibi</foreign> (white
water) were the chiefs of our two tribes,
when we resolved to exchange our lands,
and return at last beyond the <foreign rend='italic'>Masispek</foreign>
(muddy water, Mississippi) near to our old
country.<note place='foot'>These are the chiefs of the two united
tribes, that appear in the last treaty with
the United States.</note>
</p>

<p>
19. We shall be near our foes the <foreign rend='italic'>Wakon</foreign>
(god of snakes, the Ozages) but they
are not worse than the <foreign rend='italic'>Yankwiakon</foreign> (English
snake), who want to possess the whole
big island.<note place='foot'>The United States here are called
snakes like the oldest foes of mankind.
The insiduous manner in which the English
settled North America, and wronged the
natives, has procured them that appellation.
The French and Canadians are never called
snakes. The former names of <foreign rend='italic'>Yankwis</foreign>
has only been preserved as our Yankees.
The belief of their being <foreign rend='italic'>Gishakis</foreign> or children
of the sun-land, at the sun-rise, has
long been exploded here as in South America.
The Spanish cruelties did since procure
to the Castillians the names of devils,
assassins, snakes of the sea &amp;c.</note>
</p>

<p>
20. Shall we be free and happy there?
at the new <foreign rend='italic'>Wapahani</foreign> (western white river).
We want rest, and peace, and wisdom.
</p>

<p>
Such is one of the accounts of the transactions
between this people and the English,
United States &amp;c; of which Loskiel, Holm
and Hekewelder have furnished other fragments,
and for which we have ample materials
in the colonial history and late records.
But this offers some new views and facts:
which shall be partly compared and discussed
in the notes; but more properly
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
examined and united in accordance with
other narratives, in the history of the North
American nations and tribes. The 11
kings in about 220 years named in this
fragment, indicate 107 altogether till 1820
and later.
</p>

<p>
That so many generations and names can
be recollected, may appear doubtful to some;
but when symbolic signs and paintings,
with poetical songs, are added, the memory
can well retain and perpetuate their connection.
Even in Polynesia, where we
are not told of symbols, but mere historical
songs, they reach to the creation and flood;
Ellis and Tierman tell us that the kings
and priests of Tahiti, Ulieta or Raiaka,
Hawahi, Mowi &amp;c. could repeat the names
of ancestors and kings for 100 generations.
It would have been well if instead of giving
us mere fragments of the songs and names,
they had translated the whole, and thus
furnished the connected annals of Polynesia.
</p>

<p>
In the Linapi annals, we find not merely
their own deeds; but the mention of many
other nations, friends, allies or foes, as in
Cusick's Traditions of the Ongwis: and
this forms another clue for American history.
As early as the Asiatic period we
find them united to the related people
<foreign rend='italic'>Owini</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Nijini</foreign>, before the flood, and calling
their foes <foreign rend='italic'>Powako</foreign>
(rich snake), <foreign rend='italic'>Makowini</foreign>
(bad being,) <foreign rend='italic'>Maskanako</foreign> (strong
snake), similar to the satanic tribes of the
Hebrews &amp;c.<note place='foot'>Many other notions on the primitive
nations, may be collected from the mythologies
of the various Linapi tribes. Their
true devils are similar to vampyres.</note>
</p>

<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>

<p>
At the flood they are saved with the
<foreign rend='italic'>Tulapin</foreign> turtlemen, and begin to call
themselves <foreign rend='italic'>Linapewi</foreign>. Soon after they
separate, go north and divide into tribes,
named after the winds, the mode of life
and animals. The hunters are <foreign rend='italic'>Elowi</foreign> Elohim
of the orientals, or Heros and Hercules;
they again meet snakemen, who fly to America
and must have produced there many
nations.
</p>

<p>
After having filled the north, and after
the breaking of the land, at Behring strait,
part of the nation resolve to follow and
pursue the snakes to the east. The passage
by the <foreign rend='italic'>Olinis</foreign> over the hard sea or ice, is
beautifully sung in a peculiar hymn (see
last note); they settle at Shinaki, and begin
again to war on snakemen: after which the
beaver men or Tamakwi separate going east
where they became the Dinni nations, yet
called beaver tribes, who ascribe their origin
to a beaver and a dog, and call their
ancestor <foreign rend='italic'>Chapewi</foreign>,
similar to <foreign rend='italic'>Apiwi</foreign>, the
manly in Linapi.
</p>

<p>
Meantime the main tribe going south
meets other nations which it is difficult to
identify, as the names are mere epithets
and nicknames, yet the <foreign rend='italic'>Assinipi</foreign> or stony
men, appear to be the Dacota or Sioux yet
called Assini or stony by the tribes of Linapi
origin. They reappear afterwards as
<foreign rend='italic'>Maskan-sini</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Sinako</foreign>, and appear to have
passed to America soon after the Linapi.
They are certainly of Asiatic origin, as the
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
languages prove, and very akin to the Hurons
or Ongwis in America.
</p>

<p>
The <foreign rend='italic'>Akowini</foreign> are met again, which appear
to have become the ancestors of the
Cowetas and many Florida tribes. The
<foreign rend='italic'>Lowanuski</foreign> were either the Uskis or the
Skeres. The <foreign rend='italic'>Towakon</foreign> were not the Ottawas;
but probably the Ozages or their
ancestors the Wakons.<note place='foot'>Wakon is the god and ancestor of
all the Washashas or Ozage tribes, Arkanzas,
Sioux &amp;c. belonging to the <foreign rend='italic'>Capaha</foreign> or
Missouri group of nations.</note>
</p>

<p>
At last they meet the civilized <foreign rend='italic'>Talegas</foreign>,
who are not called snakes, but rather extolled,
and from whom they borrowed many
things: their symbol is very different from
that of the snakes. They were probably
of eastern or atlantic origin, akin to the
Tols, Talascas, and Telicos the ancient
Cherokis. The <foreign rend='italic'>Talamatan</foreign> become allies,
were the Hurons, the name means both <foreign rend='italic'>unlike
the Talegas</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>killer of the Talas</foreign>.&mdash;See
Cusick, and my Huron Traditions for
their own annals.
</p>

<p>
The separations of the Nentegos and
Shawanis, Mohigans, and Wapanends or
Abenakis, are distinctly given; they filled
the sea shores from Florida to Acadia.
Three tribes of snakes reappear which are
similar to the former, except the <foreign rend='italic'>Lowako</foreign>
probably the same as <foreign rend='italic'>Lowanuski</foreign>. After
crossing the Alleghanies Tamenend II. reunites
all the tribes. The <foreign rend='italic'>Hiliniki</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Conowiki</foreign> easily identified remain west of
the mountains. The Iroquois and Eries
appear under peculiar Linapi names.
</p>

<p>
The Otalis and Cowetas appear soon
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
after as snakes or foes; whether the Otalis
or Cherokis of the mountains were real
snakes of the west is doubtful; it is more
likely that they are a fragment of the Telicos,
which was their capital till lately, and
later they are called <foreign rend='italic'>Otaliwi</foreign> by the Linapis.
Compare the Tzuluki traditions with these.
</p>

<p>
The Tawas who call themselves fathers,
as the Linapi grandfathers, of all the akin
tribes, had then towards 1400, a great
power in the west: their empire had a
pontiff <foreign rend='italic'>Mushkiwis</foreign> near lake Michigan, on
whom Cass has given some very important
traditions.
</p>

<p>
The following chief chronological periods
are deducible from these annals, by reckoning
3 generations in a century. About
1600 years before Christ passage of Behring
strait on the ice, lead by <foreign rend='italic'>Wapalanewa</foreign>,
settlement at <foreign rend='italic'>Shinaki</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
1450. <foreign rend='italic'>Chilili</foreign> leads them south, and the
<foreign rend='italic'>Tamakwi</foreign> separate.
</p>

<p>
1040. Peace after long wars under <foreign rend='italic'>Langundewi</foreign>
at the land <foreign rend='italic'>Akolaking</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
800. Annals written by <foreign rend='italic'>Olumapi</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
750. <foreign rend='italic'>Takwachi</foreign> leads
to <foreign rend='italic'>Minihaking</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
650. <foreign rend='italic'>Penkwonwi</foreign> leads east over mountains.
</p>

<p>
460. The first <foreign rend='italic'>Tamenend</foreign> great king on
the Missouri.
</p>

<p>
60. <foreign rend='italic'>Opekasit</foreign> leads to the Mississippi.
</p>

<p>
About 50 years of our era, alliance with
the <foreign rend='italic'>Talamatans</foreign>
against the <foreign rend='italic'>Talegas</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
150. Conquest or expulsion of the <foreign rend='italic'>Talegas</foreign>.
</p>

<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>

<p>
400. <foreign rend='italic'>Lekhihitan</foreign> writes the annals.
</p>

<p>
540. Separation of the Shawanis and
Nentegos.
</p>

<p>
800. <foreign rend='italic'>Wapalawikwan</foreign> leads over Alleghany
mountains to <foreign rend='italic'>Amangaki</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
970. <foreign rend='italic'>Wolomenap</foreign> settles the central capital
at Trenton, and the Mohigans separate.
</p>

<p>
1170. Under <foreign rend='italic'>Pitenumen</foreign>
arrival of <foreign rend='italic'>Wapsi</foreign>
the first white men or Europeans.
</p>

<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Additional Note.</hi> As a specimen of the
original text and poetry of these annals, I
give now the poem on the passage to America:
the whole text and all the symbols will
be given hereafter.
</p>

<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>

<lg>
<l>13. Amakolen</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Nallahemen</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Agunuken</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Powasinep</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Wapasinep</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Akomenep.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>14. Wihlamok Kicholen luchundi</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Wematan akomen luchundi.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>15. Witéhen wémiluen</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Wémaken nihillen.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>16. Nguttichin Lowaniwi</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Nguttichin Wapanawi</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Agamunk topanpek</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Wulliton épannek.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>17. Wulélémil W'shakuppek</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Wémopannek hakhsinipek</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Kìtahìkan pokhakhopek</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>18. Tellenchen Kittapaki nillawi</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Wémoltin gutikuni nillawi</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Akomen wapanaki nillawi</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Ponskan-ponskan wémìwi Olini</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>19. Lowanapi Wapanapi Shawanapi</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Lanéwapi Tamakwapi Tuméwapi</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Elowapi Powatapi Wilawapi</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Okwisapi Danisapi Allumapi.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>20. Wemipayat gunéunga Shinaking</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Wunkénapi chanélendam payaking</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>Allowélendam kowiyey Tulpaking.</l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VI.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The poetical annals and traditions of
the Haytians or Tainos of the Antilles</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>collected in 1498 by</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Roman &amp;c.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>with additions by</hi>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dangleria</hi> <hi rend='italic'>and
others, Notes, Remarks, and Ancient
Tribes</hi>.
</quote>

<p>
Roman was a Jeromitan friar, come with
Columbus, who began to convert the Haytians
in 1496, and collected their traditions,
after learning their language, out of the
<foreign rend='italic'>Areitos</foreign> or songs and hymns used in festivals.
He wrote them in 1498 by order of
Columbus, and they are inserted at large
in his life by his son; but were almost neglected
by Irving. They give us not only
an insight into the belief, religion, traditions
of the Antillian people; but also a compendium
of fragments on their annals.
Although very desultory, much less connected
than those of Mexico, the Linapis, Ongwis
&amp;c., and destitute of chronology; yet
they afford an essential addition to American
history, and the ancient accounts about
the Atlantis and Antilles.
</p>

<p>
In order to bring them into a kind of
order, they shall be analyzed, reduced to
a succession of events and divided into 3
parts, 1. Cosmogony and Theogony, 2.
the flood and primitive history, 3. ancient
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
history previous to Columbus or 1492. A
fourth part foreign to these traditions would
be their annals since that time, and till the
extinction of the nation; which shall be
given hereafter, with the account of the
language, and civilization&mdash;What is peculiar
to these traditions among the Americans,
are the metamorphoses of men into
beasts &amp;c., as in Ovid.
</p>

<p>
The nation who furnished these annals,
was the Haytian of Hayti, a branch of the
nation dwelling also in Cuba, and filling
the Lucayes and smaller Antilles: whose
collective proper name was <hi rend='smallcaps'>Taino</hi> meaning
noble. But they acknowledged as brothers,
many tribes of the continent under the collective
name of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guatiaos</hi> brothers, this
was ascertained in 1520 by Figueroa.&mdash;(See
Herrera.) These <foreign rend='italic'>Guatiaos</foreign> were the
Aruac nations and tribes, that were not
cannibals. These tribes as enumerated by
Figueroa in 1520 were in the Antilles the
1. Haytians, 2. Cubans, 3. Jamaicans, 4.
Boriquans (Porto Rico), 5. Cairis that
dwelt in Trinidad, Barbuda, Marmagitas
and Gianis Islands. While those of the
continent were the 1. Aruacas of Guyana,
2. Paracurias of Cubagua, 3. Urinatos of
Oronoc, 4. Pavonas of Cariaco, 5. Cariatis,
6. Cumanas, 7. Chiribichis, 8. Coquibocoa,
9. Unatos. These five last were intermixt
with the <foreign rend='italic'>Canibas</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Caribas</foreign>, the cannibal
tribes, foes of the <foreign rend='italic'>Guatiaos</foreign>, which are the
Galibis and Carib tribes; that had desolated
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
and conquered most of the eastern
Antilles.
</p>

<p>
All the Tainos spoke the same language
divided into several dialects; but understood
reciprocally. D'Angleria tells us in
1512 that two distinct languages were used
in Cuba, the eastern was a mere dialect of
Hayti; but in the west was a very different
language not understood; this was the
<foreign rend='italic'>Cami</foreign> derived
from the <foreign rend='italic'>Olmeca</foreign> of Oaxaca
or the <foreign rend='italic'>Maya</foreign> of Yucatan; they having sent
there a colony, and founded a kingdom.&mdash;(see
the Maya History.) In Hayti there
was also in the center of the island a kingdom
of Mayas? the people were called
<foreign rend='italic'>Mayo-riexes</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Macoryxes</foreign>, (meaning
<hi rend='italic'>Maya people</hi>). They spoke a language
different from the Haytian (Dangleria)
divided into 3 dialects <foreign rend='italic'>Cayabo</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Cubaba</foreign>,
and <foreign rend='italic'>Baichagua</foreign>. This kingdom of strangers
was called <foreign rend='italic'>Cubaba</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Caibaba</foreign>, and
<foreign rend='italic'>Ziguayos</foreign>. They are called Caribs by
some authors; but erroneously.<note place='foot'>The account of these strangers in
Hayti is very slender and confused, some
writers deem them the ancestors of all the
Caribs; yet they acknowledge Caonabo
as a late comer. <foreign rend='italic'>Mayo-banex</foreign> name of
their last king means Maya-head in the
Maya language. They must have been an
ancient colony or remain of the Mayas,
since they had already three dialects. All
strangers were called Caribs at last by the
Haytians, whence the blunder.</note>
</p>

<p>
Many other additional traditions on the
Antilles are scattered in early writers,
D'Angleria, Gomara, Herrera, Munoz,
Acosta, St. Mery, Oviedo, Columbus, Brigstock,
Rochefort, Edwards, Garcia, Laet,
&amp;c. which shall be partly noticed here as
a sequel to Roman, and all connected as a
general outline of a history of the Antillian
nations.
</p>

<p>
Having succeeded to make out a fine
vocabulary of nearly three hundred words
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
of the Taino dialects, collected from Roman,
Columbus, Dangleria, Munoz, Las-Casas,
Herrera, Gili, Humboldt, Vater
&amp;c.&mdash;and another of about 150 words of
the <foreign rend='italic'>Cairi</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Eyeri</foreign> language of the Aruac
Islanders out of Dudley, Rochefort &amp;c.
I will be enabled to translate and elucidate
nearly all the Taino historical names and
allusions, so as to clear up the annals by
original etymologies. The orthography
will be Spanish, J must be pronounced as
Kh, and X as Sh.
</p>

<p>
The Haytians had besides these songs,
other annals; since the priests taught history,
and the origin of things to the sons of
the nobles. They had also perhaps peculiar
symbols to keep their records, since
Dangleria mentions that they had paintings
of beasts, tygers, eagles &amp;c. on cotton,
hung to walls. St. Mery says that in 1787
was found in the mountains of Guanaminto
a tomb with a stone of 6 feet covered with
hieroglyphs! and in the mountains of Limbé,
engravings of human figures on a serpentine
rock; besides many sculptures in
Caves. Columbus saw in 1492 in Inagua
one of Lucayes a gold medal <emph>with letters
on it</emph>! If we had figures of these hieroglyphs
and engraved symbols, we should
probably obtain another clue to American
history and graphic systems. But they are
probably lost by neglect like those of North
America! The Antilles being on the way
from the east to the continent must have
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
served as a stepping place to many nations
on their passage to the continent.<note place='foot'>Traces
of 44 distinct nations or tribes
are found in the ancient history of the
Antilles, (see last note) which are the ancestors
of all the American nations of eastern
origin by the Atlantic ocean.</note>
</p>

<p>
1st Part.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Theogony and Cosmogony.</hi>
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Fact.</hi> The Supreme God, bears
five names or titles given by Roman and
Dangleria in two dialects, and is male or
female.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{0.5cm} p{2cm} p{2cm} p{2cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(4) lw(13) lw(13) lw(10)'">
<row><cell></cell><cell>By Roman</cell><cell>By Dangleria</cell>
     <cell>Meanings</cell></row>
<row><cell>1.</cell><cell>Attabei</cell><cell>Attabeira</cell>
     <cell>Unic-Being.</cell></row>
<row><cell>2.</cell><cell>Jemao</cell><cell>Mamona</cell><cell>Eternal.</cell></row>
<row><cell>3.</cell><cell>Guacas or Apito</cell><cell>Guaca-rapita</cell>
     <cell>Infinite.</cell></row>
<row><cell>4.</cell><cell>Apito or Siella</cell><cell>Liella</cell>
     <cell>Omnipotent.</cell></row>
<row><cell>5.</cell><cell>Zuimaco</cell><cell>Guimazoa</cell><cell>Invisible.</cell></row>
</table>

<p>
Roman calls it female, Dangleria a male
God. The titles of this god are sufficient
to indicate the supreme God of nature, and
they have astonishing analogies with the
primitive God of Asia and Europe, the
Basks, Pelasgians, Atlantes, Guanches &amp;c.
The most common name was the first, in
Cuba <foreign rend='italic'>Atabex</foreign>. This and other great Gods
were not sculptured in idols. The Chillians
had similar names for the Supreme
God.<note place='foot'>These titles of the Supreme God might
furnish many pages of compared analogies.
<foreign rend='italic'>Mamona</foreign> is identic
with the <foreign rend='italic'>Mammon</foreign> of
Africa and Asia. <foreign rend='italic'>Liella</foreign> has analogies
with all the EL or suns, gods and lords of
the east. <foreign rend='italic'>Atabeira</foreign> is
identic with <foreign rend='italic'>Atabyrius</foreign>
the Jove of the Phrygians and
Pelasgians: The meaning <emph>Unic-being</emph> has
analogies in <foreign rend='italic'>Ata-beira</foreign> all over the world.
<foreign rend='italic'>Ata</foreign> is one or first in many languages.
Compare <foreign rend='italic'>Atmon</foreign> of Egypt,
<foreign rend='italic'>Baracata</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Paraxacta</foreign> the nature
or mother of <foreign rend='italic'>Brama</foreign>
of the Hindus. <foreign rend='italic'>Mamona</foreign>
with <foreign rend='italic'>Vimana</foreign>
eternal god of the Jains, the <foreign rend='italic'>Manitos</foreign>
of North America. <foreign rend='italic'>Até</foreign> was god in Thracian,
<foreign rend='italic'>Ata</foreign> in Brazil,
<foreign rend='italic'>Etua</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>Heyta</foreign> in
Polynesia. The names of God in the
Cantabrian and Oscan dialects is <foreign rend='italic'>Ian</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Ion</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Jauna</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Jain</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Janieva</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Janugoieva</foreign>
&amp;c. similar to <foreign rend='italic'>Jemao</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Jocana</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>Hiauna</foreign>
of Hayti.</note>
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Fact.</hi> This God was father or mother
of another great God dwelling in the
sun with a double name, variable in the
dialects.
</p>

<table rend="latexcolumns: 'p{2cm} p{2cm} p{2cm}';
             tblcolumns: 'lw(15) lw(15) lw(15)'">

<row><cell></cell><cell>First Name.</cell><cell>Second Name.</cell></row>
<row><cell>By Roman</cell><cell>Iocahuna</cell><cell>Guamaarocon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>By Dangleria</cell><cell>Iocauna</cell><cell>Guamaonocon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>In Cuba</cell><cell>Yocahuna</cell><cell>Guamaoxocoti.</cell></row>
<row><cell>In Jamaica</cell><cell>Yocahuna</cell><cell>&mdash;&mdash;</cell></row>
<row><cell>In Boriquen</cell><cell>Iacana</cell><cell>Guamanomocon.</cell></row>
<row><cell>By Oviedo</cell><cell>Iovana</cell><cell>Guamamona.</cell></row>
<row><cell>Variations</cell><cell>Iocavaghama</cell><cell>Guamochyna.</cell></row>
</table>

<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>

<p>
The explication of these names is not
given; but they are identic with the gods
of the Cantabrians, and Guanches of Canary
islands.&mdash;The first appears to be the
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Jehovah</hi> and
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Yao</hi> of the Orientals, and is
evidently the <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hunaku</hi> or Supreme God of
the <foreign rend='italic'>Mayas</foreign>. The second name means
<emph>Lord of the World</emph> (<foreign rend='italic'>Guama-ocon</foreign>) and is
a title.<note place='foot'><foreign rend='italic'>Gua-ma-o-con</foreign>
was such-great-of-world,
in the early monosyllabic language
of the Antilles. Compare with <foreign rend='italic'>Con-el</foreign>, and
the gods of the Atlantes, Guanches &amp;c.</note>
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Event.</hi> This last God made the
World, the Heavens <foreign rend='italic'>Turei</foreign>, and the Earth
before the terrestrial sun and moon; also
the <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zemis</hi> or angels, who are male and
female lesser gods, worshipped in idols, and
intercessors with the great gods. In the
dialects <foreign rend='italic'>Zemes</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Chemes</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Chemis</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
All the ancestors are since called <foreign rend='italic'>Zemis</foreign>:
their worship was spread through America,
under various names, and forms: as well
as in the east. They are the
</p>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Shemayim</foreign> (Heavenly) of the Hebrews.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Shemsia</foreign> of the Pehlavis of Persia.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Samana &amp; Hamsa</foreign> of the Hindus.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Shams</foreign> of the Arabic.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Esmun</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Saman</foreign> of the old Irish.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Eshman</foreign> (devil) of the Carthuls of Caucasus.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Sumari</foreign> of Thibet, <foreign rend='italic'>Chuman</foreign> of Tartary.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Camus</foreign>, a synonym of Magi of Persia.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Shin</foreign> of the Chinese.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Zamzumin</foreign> ancient giants of Arabia.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Chamin &amp; Zaones</foreign> of Egypt.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Chama</foreign> of the Phrygians.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Chamina</foreign> of the Etruscans.</l>
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Zeones &amp; Zanim</foreign> of the Ammonians.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Zamones</foreign> (blest) of the Lybians.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Lemes</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Zanes</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Annas</foreign> of the Pelasgians.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Chemin</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Shemsho</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Naemas</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>Zamiel</foreign>
of Aram or Syria and Phenicia. <foreign rend='italic'>Chemarim</foreign> Priests.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Zin</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Kami</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Kamona</foreign> of Japan and Yedzo.</l>
</lg>

<p>
While in America we find the <foreign rend='italic'>Chemim</foreign>
of the Carib women.
</p>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tezmin</foreign> of the Mayas.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Inama</foreign> of the Apalachis.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Manito</foreign> of the Linapis.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Camayos</foreign> of the Peruvians.&mdash;Which are
all identic in meaning <emph>Angels</emph>, <emph>Spirits</emph> and
their idols. This name changes elsewhere
in sound: just like <foreign rend='italic'>Enzel</foreign> in Teutonic,
which has the import of <foreign rend='italic'>El</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Aones</foreign>, and
<foreign rend='italic'>Zemes</foreign>, is root
of our <emph>Angel</emph> now pronounced
<foreign rend='italic'>Endjel</foreign>. This oriental connection
of ideas, names and worship, appears to
be evident. They are not less in <foreign rend='italic'>Turei</foreign>
heaven, <foreign rend='italic'>Uran</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Turan</foreign> of the primitive
nation &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>4th Event.</hi> Some of these <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zemis</hi> became
bad beings, and devils <foreign rend='italic'>Tuyra</foreign>, who send
diseases, hurricanes (<foreign rend='italic'>Furacan</foreign>), earthquakes
and thunders to desolate the earth
and mankind.
</p>

<p>
The names of <foreign rend='italic'>Tuyra</foreign> for devil and evil
has analogies throughout the earth. The
most striking are
</p>

<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Out of America.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Zitura</foreign> of Basks.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Guirati</foreign> of Biscayans.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Vetura</foreign> in Bali of Pallis.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tororu</foreign> of Nukahiva island.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Yarua</foreign> of the Berber Atlantes.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Yurena</foreign> of the Guanches Atlantes.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Daruj</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Puyri</foreign> of
Zend.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Turug</foreign> of Celts.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tairi</foreign> in Turkish.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tahyri</foreign> of Tahiti.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Fara</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Wara</foreign> of
Japan.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tarada</foreign> of the Papuas.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Uritiram</foreign> Synonym of Shiva.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Teripis</foreign> of Oscans.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tyranos</foreign> of Greeks.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>In America.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Yares</foreign> of the
<foreign rend='italic'>Tayronas</foreign> the Cyclops or forgers of Santa Marta.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Sura</foreign> of Poyays.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tziri</foreign> of Poconchi.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Huraqui</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Sura</foreign> of Apalachi.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tiviri</foreign> of the Yaquis.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kiuras</foreign> of the Powhatans.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tarahu</foreign>, of the Tarahumaras.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Prororu</foreign> of Cumana, derived from
<foreign rend='italic'>Pregonero</foreign> another subsequent devil of Hayti.</l>
</lg>

<p>
By the change of R to L, we have the
<foreign rend='italic'>Tulas</foreign> and Atlantes
of America.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>See Taraguva</hi>
of 10th Event.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>5th Event.</hi> The good Zemis were appointed
to make the earth and men, and to
rule over both. <foreign rend='italic'>Guabanzex</foreign>, a female
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
Zemis, made the air and water, and became
the goddess of the ocean and winds.
</p>

<p>
This will answer to the first period of
the earth creation, when the water was
above the land, and the <foreign rend='italic'>Rkio</foreign> of Moses
was divided. The name appears to mean
<emph>the windy</emph>.<note place='foot'><p>Compare the following words for winds
with <foreign rend='italic'>Gua-banzex</foreign>.
</p>
<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Vayajam</foreign> Sanscrit.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Band</foreign> old Arabic.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Watem</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Vato</foreign> Zend.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Bangin</foreign> Bali.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Bentus</foreign> old Latin.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Ventus</foreign> Latin.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Andas</foreign> Etruscan.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Abka</foreign> Abask.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Sabam</foreign> Ceylon.
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>6th Event.</hi> The male Zemis <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jaia</hi>
(<foreign rend='italic'>Khaya</foreign>,
the earth) made the earth and islands; he
is the <foreign rend='italic'>Aion</foreign> of Sanchoniation. Every land
and island is animated. The island of Hayti
was a great animal like a turtle; the head
and mouth was in the east, the west end of
it was a long tail, called <foreign rend='italic'>Guaca-iarima</foreign>
(country of the Vent). The caves were
the holes of the body, venerated and used
afterwards as temples and tombs.
</p>

<p>
This notion, and comparison of islands
with turtles, recalls to mind the primitive
turtle land of the Chinese, Hindus, Linapis
&amp;c. <foreign rend='italic'>Jaia</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Kaya</foreign>
for land has affinities
all over the world and is a primitive
word.<note place='foot'><p>It was <foreign rend='italic'>Jaia</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Khaya</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Cayo</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Hay</foreign> in
the dialects and it is pure Greek and Egyptian.
Compare <foreign rend='italic'>Aya</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Ai</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Eia</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Ia</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Gaya</foreign>,
in the Pelasgic dialects, since become <foreign rend='italic'>Aya</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Yaia</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Gea</foreign> in Greek.
</p>
<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Kahi</foreign> Egyptian.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Akhé</foreign> Zend.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Kay</foreign> Deri of Iran.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Iya</foreign> Sanscrit.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Ca</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Aion</foreign> Phenician.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Ay</foreign> Lybian.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Aya</foreign> old Irish.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Ayate</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Gays</foreign> Ausonian and Oscan.
</p>
<p>
In America numerous analogies are found,
</p>
<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Aya</foreign> Betoy, <foreign rend='italic'>A</foreign> in Lulé,
<foreign rend='italic'>Catun</foreign> Tzuluki,
<foreign rend='italic'>Acuti</foreign> Moxos &amp;c.
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>7th Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jaia</hi> afterwards had a son,
who was called <foreign rend='italic'>Jaia-El</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Higuera</foreign>, or <foreign rend='italic'>Hibuera</foreign>
earth-son gourd.
</p>

<p>
This first man like Adam is son of the
earth, and an EL or Angel, <foreign rend='italic'>Elohim</foreign> of the
orientals; it means in Haytian, son, offspring,
family and tribe. It will often recur
in subsequent history, in the singular for
the plural. The plurals were <foreign rend='italic'>Eli</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Ili</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>guaili</foreign>.&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>Gua</foreign>
is only the article <emph>This or
Such</emph>.<note place='foot'>EL for son was primitive Haytian
and synonymous with tribe, children, family,
divine or son of God as in Asia. In the
dialects <foreign rend='italic'>Rabu</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Rahen</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Muru &amp;c.</foreign> meant
Son. Compare <foreign rend='italic'>Ili</foreign> tribe in Persian,
<foreign rend='italic'>Zitl</foreign>
man in Circassian, <foreign rend='italic'>Leh</foreign> Osset,
<foreign rend='italic'>Lez</foreign> Lezghi.
<foreign rend='italic'>Lele</foreign> in Pelasgian, UL in
Turan, now <foreign rend='italic'>Oglu</foreign>
in Turk&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>Olgos</foreign> Eolian,
<foreign rend='italic'>Vulgus</foreign> Latin,
<foreign rend='italic'>Chuli</foreign> in Carthulan,
<foreign rend='italic'>Oleos</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Laos</foreign> in Greek,
<foreign rend='italic'>Eleuth</foreign> in Mongol,
<foreign rend='italic'>Chula</foreign> old Spanish, <foreign rend='italic'>Alu</foreign>
Copt, <foreign rend='italic'>Bail</foreign> Etruscan,
<foreign rend='italic'>Cobayl</foreign> Berber, <foreign rend='italic'>Haial</foreign>
in D. <foreign rend='italic'>Shiluh</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Ulu</foreign>
Afgan, <foreign rend='italic'>Eli</foreign> Hungarian,
<foreign rend='italic'>Filius</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>fam-ilia</foreign>
Latin &amp;c. Even our
words <emph>Fellow</emph>, <emph>Child</emph> and <emph>Folks</emph> derive
from this ancient source, the oriental EL,
IL, OL.&mdash;In America we find it in the
OL-mecas, Chols &amp;c.&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>Olo</foreign> in Vilela,
<foreign rend='italic'>Yoale</foreign> Abipon, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Eles</hi>
Mexican &amp;c.</note>
</p>

<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>8th Event.</hi> The sun and moon called
<foreign rend='italic'>Boiniael</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Maroio</foreign> by Roman; but
<foreign rend='italic'>Binthaitel</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Marohu</foreign> by Dangleria and
Ovieda, come out of the cave <foreign rend='italic'>Jovovava</foreign>:
they are Zemis and foes of mankind. A
cave with the same name was their temple
in Hayti. Dangleria calls it <foreign rend='italic'>Iovana-boina</foreign>
Jove Solar.
</p>

<p>
The exact time of this appearance is
doubtful, and there appears to be two
blended events, one of cosmogony alluding
to the sun being long obscured by the primitive
misty atmosphere, another historical
alluding to the solar and lunar dynasties of
Asia or America. The meaning of <foreign rend='italic'>Jovo-vava</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Kovo-vava</foreign> is cave of fathers, both
primitive names. The solar and lunar
names have many analogies elsewhere,
among which the chief are
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of the Sun.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Oin</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Oein</foreign> of Arabs and Ethiopia.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Oboh</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Baion</foreign>, old Egyptian.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Baon</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Oan</foreign> of Assyrians.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ian</foreign> of the Etruscans.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Belen</foreign> of the Gauls.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Bun</foreign> of the Zend.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Abolion</foreign> of the Pelasgians.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Abloin</foreign> of the Thessalians.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Ntiélé</foreign> of the Illyrians.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Bian</foreign> of the Ausonians.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Anactes</foreign> of the Mysians.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Names of the Moon.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Yarho</foreign> of the Syrians.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Aohri</foreign> of the Tibus.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Warha</foreign> of the Ethiopians.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Carara</foreign> of the Etruscans.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Teoro</foreign> of the Betoys, S. A.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Heriho</foreign> of Canaan.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Humuri</foreign> of Old Arabic.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Matuaré</foreign> of Carthul, Caucasus.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Maraca</foreign> of Guaramis, S. A.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Marama</foreign> of Polynesia.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kamar</foreign> in Maroco.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Kamaria</foreign> in Pehlvi.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Gumara</foreign> in Nubian.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Most of these synonyms and analogies
are found in the most ancient languages:
to which may be added that in the ancient
Haikan language of Armenia, the sun and
moon were called <foreign rend='italic'>Noah!</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Morante</foreign>,
names also of Noah and his wife.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>9th Event.</hi> The female Zemis,
<foreign rend='italic'>Coatris-quia</foreign>
makes the springs and streams to flow
over the earth, and became their goddess.
</p>

<p>
This is another period of oriental cosmogony,
that of the irruption of subterranean
waters and rain, which in the bible is posterior
to Adam. The name of the Zemis is
of doubtful meaning, probably <foreign rend='italic'>Coatris-quia</foreign>,
hollow-quite. <foreign rend='italic'>Coa</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Cua</foreign> was the name
of ancient hollow temples all over America.
<foreign rend='italic'>Quia</foreign> is
found in <foreign rend='italic'>Quisqueia</foreign> oldest name of
Hayti or the <emph>great</emph> (land) <emph>universal</emph>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>10th Event.</hi> <foreign rend='italic'>Taragava-el</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Corocora</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Epileguanita</foreign>, two male Zemis of the
woods and hunters, made the trees and
beasts. This includes probably two events
anterior to the men, unless they be men.
</p>

<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>

<p>
The meanings of these Zemis which
might guide us, are quite doubtful. <foreign rend='italic'>Taraguva</foreign>
resembles <foreign rend='italic'>Tuyra</foreign>
and also <foreign rend='italic'>Turei</foreign>
heaven; but <foreign rend='italic'>Epileguanita</foreign> was probably
the ancient god of the <foreign rend='italic'>Caracol</foreign> or Beastly-men,
since it was represented by a beast
or quadruped; while all the other Zemis
as men and women. <foreign rend='italic'>Ili-guanita</foreign> would
mean in Haytian <emph>children of the people</emph>.
Therefore I presume that these are personifications
of the ancient hunters, or men
of the woods with the beastly and savage
men of early times. Roman calls the second
<foreign rend='italic'>Corocore</foreign>, synonyme
of <foreign rend='italic'>Caracara</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
Part II. <hi rend='italic'>Antidiluvian History and Flood.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>11th Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jaia-El</hi> rebels against his
father <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jaia</hi> and wants to kill him; a warfare,
in which <foreign rend='italic'>Jaia-El</foreign> is killed by his father,
who puts his bones into a gourd. <foreign rend='italic'>Higuera</foreign>,
or <foreign rend='italic'>Hibuera</foreign>, and people the land of that
name.
</p>

<p>
This refers to the fall of man and the
wars of the Titans. The name for bones
is omitted, it would perhaps afford another
clue. Many American nations venerate
and animate bones. Dangleria says, that
<foreign rend='italic'>Jaia</foreign> peopled all the islands of the sea with
these bones.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>12th Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jaia</hi> being childless marries
<foreign rend='italic'>Itiba-Jatuvava</foreign> from whom he has 4 twin
sons called <foreign rend='italic'>Dimivan</foreign>, who became afterwards
<foreign rend='italic'>Cara-cara-cols</foreign> or the great Cara-cols,
the great beastly beings; but their
mother dies at their birth.
</p>

<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>

<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Itiba</foreign> means woman ancient and alludes
perhaps to <foreign rend='italic'>Thibet</foreign>, refuge, or land of Noah.
(<emph>I</emph>, is the article <emph>the</emph>).
<foreign rend='italic'>Jatuvava</foreign> perhaps
Japhet-father, but in Aruac <foreign rend='italic'>Kati-uiua</foreign>
means the moon heavenly. The name of
<foreign rend='italic'>Dimivan</foreign> is remarkable, being identic with
the <foreign rend='italic'>Demavends</foreign> or antidiluvians of Persia,
called <foreign rend='italic'>Dawand</foreign> in the Zendavesta, the
<foreign rend='italic'>Demoi</foreign> or old people of the Pelasgians, the
<foreign rend='italic'>Demons</foreign> of many nations.
The <foreign rend='italic'>Caras</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Cols</foreign> are found all over America and
Asia.<note place='foot'>The <foreign rend='italic'>Cols</foreign>
are perhaps the Chols, Olmecas,
<foreign rend='italic'>Colas</foreign> of Florida,
<foreign rend='italic'>Collas</foreign> of Peru &amp;c.
The <foreign rend='italic'>Caras</foreign> may be the ancient Caribs, or
the Guaranis, the <foreign rend='italic'>Caras</foreign> of
Peru, the <foreign rend='italic'>Coras</foreign>
of Mexico &amp;c.; compare with the ancient
Carians and many other primitive
nations.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>13th Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ahiacavo</hi> (grand father) or
<foreign rend='italic'>Baia-manicoel</foreign> an
ancestor of the <foreign rend='italic'>Dimivan</foreign>,
forms the nation of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Con-El</hi>,
at <foreign rend='italic'>Basamanaco</foreign>,
and invents agriculture, with the
art of making cakes and bread.
</p>

<p>
The Dimivan acknowledge him as grandfather
of mankind. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Con-El</hi> is certainly a
personification, meaning the sons or Elohim
of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Con</hi>, who is the primitive Lybian Hercules
KON or KHON; and is found in
Peruvian history as the first legislator of
Peru. The XONS or <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cones</hi> were the
oldest people of Spain and Italy, same as
<foreign rend='italic'>Xâones</foreign> of Greece. Their god was XON
or <foreign rend='italic'>Konah</foreign>.
<foreign rend='italic'>Basamanaco</foreign> is inexplicable
unless it alludes to the primitive antidiluvian
<foreign rend='italic'>Manaco</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Manco</foreign>
of Peru. <foreign rend='italic'>Ba</foreign> is dwelling,
<foreign rend='italic'>Samana</foreign> an island near Hayti.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>14th Event.</hi> The four brothers
<foreign rend='italic'>Dimivan</foreign>
meeting a mute <foreign rend='italic'>Conel</foreign>, making bread, ask
him for some; but he only gives them instead
<foreign rend='italic'>Cogioba</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Cohiba</foreign>
which is tobacco:
this happened at the door of Basamanaco.
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
This fable indicates an intercourse of the
Dimivans and the <foreign rend='italic'>Conels</foreign> which are probably
a branch of the Atlantes or Lybians.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>15th Event.</hi> This refusal of bread was
the cause of a quarrel and war, in which
<foreign rend='italic'>Conel</foreign> kills or destroys one of the brothers
or tribes of <foreign rend='italic'>Dimivan Caracol</foreign>, but a turtle
<foreign rend='italic'>Hicotea</foreign> came out of his body, or an island
thus called, as Hayti was. This <foreign rend='italic'>Conel</foreign> conqueror
was <foreign rend='italic'>Baia-mani-coel</foreign>, whose name
means <emph>Father of food celestial</emph>; but <foreign rend='italic'>Baya</foreign>
is also the ocean.
</p>

<p>
This indicates a great war, and probably
alludes to that of the Atlantes.<note place='foot'>Although we do not meet in Hayti
the Greek name of Atlantis, we have so
many allusions to the devils <foreign rend='italic'>Taras</foreign>, and
Amazons <foreign rend='italic'>Amayuna</foreign>, that we can connect
these traditions with the Greek accounts.
The ancestors of the Haytians if Pelagians
were foes and vassals of the Atlantes;
but allies of the Amazons.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>16th Event.</hi> The <foreign rend='italic'>Dimivans</foreign>, probably
in revenge, broke the gourd of <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jaiael</hi>
(<foreign rend='italic'>Khayahel</foreign>); but a flood of waters issue
from it and drowns the land.
</p>

<p>
This deluge is called <foreign rend='italic'>Niquen</foreign>: there is
no indication in Roman of the men who
were destroyed, nor who were saved and
how; but in Cuba was found a more ample
tradition of the flood as follows.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>17th Event.</hi> Three Behiques or priests
who come to Cuba later, taught them that
the flood had been general, had broken the
land; and that a good man had been saved
in a big boat with his family. That many
animals were also in the boat, a vulture
and dove are mentioned.
</p>

<p>
Herrera and others relate this, but in different
words, and without native names.
Some have supposed this account made
out by the Spanish priests; but it appears
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
to refer to a tradition brought by the Olmecas
or Mayas in Cuba, being very similar
to the Mexican accounts.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>18th Event.</hi> Another subsequent flood
although omitted by Roman, is alluded to
by others, Garcia says that Hayti and Cuba
were then cut asunder and separated from
Yucatan. Dangleria says that the islands
Lucayas that then joined to the great
islands, were divided by irruptions of the
sea. It is the second flood of Peleg, which
in the Antilles broke the islands by volcanic
explosions. It is impossible to say what
events of the next period, may belong to
the interval between the two floods; but
probably some of them. All these antidiluvian
events appear to belong to a different
country than the Antilles, which did not
even then exist, at least in their actual
state, and may properly be referred to the
island Atlantis or the eastern hemisphere.
It was at this last cataclysm that the Antilles
assumed their actual shape and number.
</p>

<p>
Part III.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ancient History.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>19th Event.</hi> After the floods the men
dwelt in caves on the mountain <foreign rend='italic'>Cauta</foreign> in
the land of <foreign rend='italic'>Caanau</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Caunana</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Caona</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
The mountains of <foreign rend='italic'>Cauta</foreign> must have been
the refuge of men at one of the floods: they
answer probably to the <foreign rend='italic'>Cuta</foreign> of the Hindus,
name given to many rocky lands and capes
besides mountains. The <foreign rend='italic'>Ceuta</foreign> mountain
of Africa south of Gibraltar, was one of
them, also called <foreign rend='italic'>Abyla</foreign>
from the <foreign rend='italic'>Cabyles</foreign>
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
or Nomadic Berbers. Dangleria states a
tradition that men were created on that
mountain. <foreign rend='italic'>Cauta</foreign> although unexplained
is identic with <foreign rend='italic'>Icota</foreign> turtle,
<foreign rend='italic'>Ca-uta</foreign> land
raised. <foreign rend='italic'>Caona</foreign> means golden.
</p>

<p>
The land <foreign rend='italic'>Caanau</foreign> of Roman,
<foreign rend='italic'>Caunana</foreign>
of Dangleria, has been mistaken for the
land of <foreign rend='italic'>Canaan</foreign> by some writers: others
deem it Florida. Both are wrong. The
Haytians did not come from North America;
but may have sent colonies there.
They came from the east, South America
and Africa, or the Atlantis. The name
means land of Noah? (<foreign rend='italic'>Caa-Nau</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Cau-Nana</foreign>).
<foreign rend='italic'>Caunia</foreign> was the ancient name of
Asia Minor and Caria, the first Carians
were Caunians, a Pelagian tribe which
expelled by the Leleges, settled the Grecian
islands, and Lybia part of which was
called <foreign rend='italic'>Caani</foreign>. The
<foreign rend='italic'>Anakim</foreign> of Syria
giants dwelt in <foreign rend='italic'>Ca-anak</foreign>.
The <foreign rend='italic'>Khaoni</foreign>
were the ancestors of Epirians and Illyrians.
<foreign rend='italic'>Cauni</foreign> was a mauritanian tribe.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>20th Event.</hi> The sun and moon are two
great Zemis called <foreign rend='italic'>Binthaitel</foreign> (sun divine)
and his wife <foreign rend='italic'>Marohu</foreign> (moon), come out of
the cave <foreign rend='italic'>Iovana-boina</foreign> (Jehovah-Solar),
and rule the world, establishing the solar
and lunar dynasties.
</p>

<p>
This historical event must be distinguished
from the 8th. This refers to the
solar dynasties of Asia and Africa. It
must be noticed that similar places were
often shown in Hayti, as the same names
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
had been applied by the subsequent settlers,
even when the event had happened elsewhere.
In this case, these solar caves
were temples in Hayti, where the figures
of the sun and moon were worshipped, and
prayed to for rain; but Herrera says they
had their hands bound, which indicates a
conquest. Pilgrims went to those caves,
from all parts of Hayti. It was in the land
of the king <foreign rend='italic'>Mauziation-El</foreign> (Roman) or
<foreign rend='italic'>Machiunech</foreign> (Dangleria); but whether
these were former dynasties and kings or
late rulers, is difficult to ascertain.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>21st Event.</hi> <foreign rend='italic'>Maroco-El</foreign>
(lunar son) called
<foreign rend='italic'>Machocha-El</foreign> by Dangleria, held the sway
over men, who were still in Cauta and Caanau,
and kept them confined to the caves.
</p>

<p>
This indicates a lunar dominion over
mankind somewhere, and a state of confinement:
Perhaps in South America; in
Peru caves are also the first dwellings of
mankind.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>22d Event.</hi> The men were divided into
double tribes or two nations, the principal
or largest and of best men was called
<foreign rend='italic'>Cazibagiaga</foreign>&mdash;R.
<foreign rend='italic'>Cazibaxagua</foreign>&mdash;D.
(Royal Xagua) and the smaller <foreign rend='italic'>Amaianaba</foreign>&mdash;R.
<foreign rend='italic'>Amayauna</foreign>&mdash;D. (Mayas?),
ruled by Cazics for kings.
</p>

<p>
We have here two nations well indicated.
The first the <foreign rend='italic'>Giaga</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Shaguas</foreign>, indicate
the Lunar tribe, the <foreign rend='italic'>Chia</foreign> of the Muyzcas,
and other South American tribes <foreign rend='italic'>Achaguas</foreign>
of Oronoc, the <foreign rend='italic'>Chaguays</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Changas</foreign> of
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
Peru, <foreign rend='italic'>Agaches</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Agaiz</foreign> or Paraguay;
but above all the <foreign rend='italic'>Cacha</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Xauxa</foreign> antidiluvian
people of Peru. While in the second
we trace again the Amazons or Atlantes,
one of their main African tribes being the
<foreign rend='italic'>Amantes</foreign> of Solin,
another the <foreign rend='italic'>Baniabas</foreign>
of Ptolemy, both in Lybia. In America the
progeny is found in the <foreign rend='italic'>Mayas</foreign> of Yucatan,
the <foreign rend='italic'>Maynas</foreign> of East
Peru, the <foreign rend='italic'>Mamayant</foreign>
of Brazil, the Mbayas of Chaco &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
The important name of Cazic for kings
begins to appear: it is evidently oriental,
and its affinities will be shown in a note.<note place='foot'><p>Compare
<foreign rend='italic'>Cazic</foreign> with the following
names for king:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Oriental Names.</hi>
</p>
<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Ach</foreign> Egypt and Etruscan.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Vasil</foreign> of Greeks.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Kasek</foreign> in Sitka.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Cazi</foreign> in Iran.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Sheik</foreign> in Arabic.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Zic</foreign> Iberians and Sicules.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Acalic</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Agazi</foreign> Berber.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Bazilik</foreign> Pelagian.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Cahin</foreign> Lybian.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Hazil</foreign> Carian.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Cay</foreign> Zend.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Iza</foreign> Tigreh.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Cazil</foreign> Mindanao island.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Cazis</foreign> Socotora island.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Izcan</foreign> of Haikans.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Izca</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Kan</foreign> of Turans.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Casis</foreign> of Syrians.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>American Names.</hi><lb/>
</p>
<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Acachi</foreign> of Totonacas.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Wachil</foreign> of Nachez.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Zac</foreign> of Muyzcas.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Cathi</foreign> of Pinindas.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Ahatic</foreign> of Huaztecas.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Inca</foreign> of Peruvians.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Chiaca</foreign> of Coras.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Cuchi</foreign> of Puncays.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Kiuska</foreign> of Tzulukis.
</p></note>
It is akin also to <foreign rend='italic'>Kachi</foreign> sun, in the Eyeri
dialect: the <foreign rend='italic'>Washil</foreign> of the Nachez.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>23d Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Machocha-El</hi> was set by
the sun to watch the caves, and many inhabitants
of the caves were killed by the
sun, if they came out in the day time; they
could only come out at night to seek for
food. (Dangleria)
</p>

<p>
This either alludes to the great heat of
the sun in Africa and the tropics, or to a
dependance of the Lunar or Cave men
upon the Solar men. <foreign rend='italic'>Machocha</foreign> has some
affinities in the South American tribes;
<foreign rend='italic'>Machicuys</foreign> of
Tucumen, <foreign rend='italic'>Machacalis</foreign> of
Brazil, <foreign rend='italic'>Chaehas</foreign> of Perou,
<foreign rend='italic'>Chanchones</foreign> of
Quixos &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>24th Event.</hi> Some men having dared to
come in the day time, were changed into
stones by the sun; (<foreign rend='italic'>Ziba</foreign> is stone): also
<foreign rend='italic'>Machokael</foreign> for allowing it.
</p>

<p>
This fable may allude to a war, between
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
the <foreign rend='italic'>Zibas</foreign> stony or strong men and the
solar tribes. These <foreign rend='italic'>Zibas</foreign> were probably
the <foreign rend='italic'>Zipas</foreign> or princes of the Muyzcas. In
Perou there is also a fable of men changed
to stones at the primitive city of Tiahuanaco,
which merely means a war and
change of dominion. The name of <foreign rend='italic'>Ziba</foreign>
for stone is primitive.&mdash;See the Note for
affinities.<note place='foot'><p>Compare
<foreign rend='italic'>Ziba</foreign> with the following
names for stone:
</p>
<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Hiban</foreign> in Berber.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Uben</foreign> in Hebrew.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Aben</foreign> in Syriac.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Keibe</foreign> Celtic.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Siwa</foreign> Nukahiva island.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Ripa</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Rupes</foreign> in Latin.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Sitaba</foreign> Pelasgian.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Bahiba</foreign> old Arabic.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Iba</foreign> Samoyed.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Batu</foreign> Malay.
</p>
<p>
It is in America, <foreign rend='italic'>Siba</foreign> in
Cahiri, <foreign rend='italic'>Tabu</foreign>
in Yaoy; <foreign rend='italic'>Saba</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Tebu</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Tobu</foreign> in Galibi dialects,
<foreign rend='italic'>Tushub</foreign> in Huasteca,
<foreign rend='italic'>Tepe</foreign> in Mexican,
<foreign rend='italic'>Tzacapu</foreign> in Talasca &amp;c.
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>25th Event.</hi> Another set of men, going
to the shores to fish, were changed into
<foreign rend='italic'>Joboses</foreign> (myrobolan or plumb trees) by the
sun.
</p>

<p>
This metamorphose is peculiar to these
fables: although the Mexicans called the
Olmecas, fruit-people or Zapotecas. The
analogies of <foreign rend='italic'>Jobos</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Kobos</foreign> are found in
<foreign rend='italic'>Coyba</foreign> of Darien,
Cuba or <foreign rend='italic'>Coaiba</foreign>, the
<foreign rend='italic'>Mocobis</foreign> of Chaco &amp;c. Another war is
probably meant by this, and the <foreign rend='italic'>Jobos</foreign> are
a people. Have they any reference with
the <foreign rend='italic'>Jubas</foreign> of Mauritania? who formed a
divine and royal dynasty there. <foreign rend='italic'>Juba</foreign> was
also the Jove or God of the Lybians.
Several nations of Central and Mexican
America had trees for emblems.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>26th Event.</hi> The
dynasty of <foreign rend='italic'>Giona</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Hi-Auna</foreign> begins to rule over the men of
Caziba or royal caves in Cauta.
</p>

<p>
This family of rulers or Cazics became
famous afterwards as we shall see, as leaders
of tribes to America. We can easily
perceive here the ancient Pelagian tribes
of <foreign rend='italic'>Ionia</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>Aones</foreign>.
<foreign rend='italic'>Hi-Auna</foreign> means
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
<foreign rend='italic'>the-Aones</foreign>. It was this dynasty or people
that sent colonies to America: Oviedo
says this happened in the time of Hesper
12th king of Spain, about 750 years after
the flood, or 1658 years B. C. He deems
the settlers Hesperians or Cantabrians.
The root is <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ona</hi> solar name of Lybians.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>27th Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Vagoniana</hi> a ruler of the
<foreign rend='italic'>Hi-Auna</foreign>, went fishing from the cave, and
became a bird or nightingale; who crossed
the sea, and settled the island <foreign rend='italic'>Mathinino</foreign>
(Martinico) with a people of women.
<foreign rend='italic'>Dangleria</foreign>. His wife in the sea gives him
two sons which became jewels <foreign rend='italic'>Ziba</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Guanin</foreign> marble and metal.
</p>

<p>
This is a positive voyage over the Atlantic.
Whenever we meet tribes of birds,
in ancient history, they always mean travellers
and colonies, and often passage over
the sea in sailing boats, compared to birds.
The first ships of the Scandinavians and
Europeans seen in North America, were
called birds by the natives. V and B interchange
in the Haytian language as in
Greek; <foreign rend='italic'>Va-gon-iana</foreign>,
thus means <emph>Father-Solar-Iana</emph>.
His people are called women,
because unwarlike fishermen, or the Amazon
tribe. Martinico was the first island
settled by them: it bears the name of
<foreign rend='italic'>Matinino</foreign> in Roman, and was thus called
yet in 1492, Garcia mentions the 2 sons
and jewels.<note place='foot'><p>Although Matinino was one of the
names of Martinico, it may have been given
afterwards, and there may have been another
land of that name, perhaps the Atlantis
or Trinidad.
</p>
<p>
Garcia gives <foreign rend='italic'>Matalino</foreign> as a synonym,
<foreign rend='italic'>Ma</foreign> means great, and thus it would be the
great <hi rend='smallcaps'>Talino</hi>, the real great
<foreign rend='italic'>Atalantis</foreign>.
The conjecture is plausible; but the name
was afterwards transferred to South America.
If the real African Atlantis is meant,
the event must be before the last flood.
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>28th Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guagu-giona</hi> king of Caziba,
sent <foreign rend='italic'>Jadruvaba</foreign> out of the caves, to collect
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
the holy herb <foreign rend='italic'>Digo</foreign> in order to purify and
wash the body; but he was changed by the
sun into a singing bird <foreign rend='italic'>Giahuba-Bogiael</foreign>
(the-singer bird-divine), and never returns.
</p>

<p>
We have here a second voyage by sea in
a bird, and a contention with a solar people,
caused by a trading voyage to procure some
American commodity: Indigo probably
which is identic with <foreign rend='italic'>Digo</foreign>.
<foreign rend='italic'>Jadru-vaba</foreign>
or the father of <foreign rend='italic'>Khadru</foreign>, must be a new
colonist. <foreign rend='italic'>Khadru</foreign> has hardly any analogies
in America; but <foreign rend='italic'>Giahuba</foreign> in which
he was changed has some. It appears
analagous with the <foreign rend='italic'>Yaoy</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Shebaoy</foreign> two
<foreign rend='italic'>Aruac</foreign> tribes of Guyana,
and thus <foreign rend='italic'>Khadru</foreign>
might be the <foreign rend='italic'>Aruac</foreign> themselves; same
nation with the Haytians once, as the languages
prove; although extending to Tucuman
and Patagonia. The name of
<foreign rend='italic'>Aruac</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Aruagas</foreign>
was inexplicable: it
may refer to this origin, or to the <foreign rend='italic'>Rocou</foreign>
the red paint used by them. But <foreign rend='italic'>Aruac</foreign>
may also mean <foreign rend='italic'>Aluac</foreign>;
akin to the <foreign rend='italic'>Labuyu</foreign>
of the Caribs their vassals, and the <foreign rend='italic'>Aluez</foreign>
vassals of the Nachez nation. Could they
derive from the ALE angels of the east;
here reduced to servitude by foes?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>29th Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guagu-Giona</hi> irritated that
Jadru-vaba does not return, leaves the
cave of <foreign rend='italic'>Caziba</foreign> in search of him, and went
with men and women to the island Matinino,
where the women were left, while the
men went to the land of <foreign rend='italic'>Guanin</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
This is the third passage of the Atlantic,
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
unless that of <foreign rend='italic'>Vagoniana</foreign> only mentioned
by Dangleria and Garcia be the same; but
they are likely to be successive tribes of
Ionas. That all the women should be left
in Martinico is a fable, meaning that the
weakest or fishing tribes settled there or in
the islands; while the warriors went to the
American continent, called <foreign rend='italic'>Guanin</foreign>, which
has several meanings, land of Guanas or
lizard men, or land of metals. It became
afterwards the name of a peculiar metal
formed by the natural or artificial amalgam
of 18 parts gold, 6 silver, and 8 copper:
and a tribe assumed the name. <foreign rend='italic'>Guana</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Guanos</foreign> was the name of a large nation of
South America; perhaps come from the
<foreign rend='italic'>Guans</foreign> of the Canary islands; but slightly
related to the Aruacs by the languages:
yet perhaps akin: it was spread east of the
Andes, between the two tropics.<note place='foot'>This metal Guanin is the Orichalc
of the ancient Greeks; which has so much
puzzled the learned, being wrongly deemed
Platina, which would have been infusible.
It was the production of Atlantis!</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>30th Event.</hi> The children were left behind,
because afraid to cross, and were
crying after their mothers; but became
changed into <foreign rend='italic'>Tona</foreign> or opossums. Garcia
says into <foreign rend='italic'>Toa</foreign> or frogs.
</p>

<p>
There are no opossums in Hayti nor the
small islands, nor in Africa. But they are
plenty in South America, where the notion
must have sprung. This fable and metamorphosis
may imply a hidden meaning.
The opossums are the only animals bearing
their young in a pouch, as ships bear men.
Could not this indicate other ships without
sails, and thus no longer birds with wings?
</p>

<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>

<p>
TON is a remarkable word, since it is the
root of <foreign rend='italic'>Nei-ton</foreign> the Lybian neptunes or
navigators. The twin TUN are the holy
ancestors of the Chilians, <foreign rend='italic'>Tona-ca</foreign> (flesh
our) is the ancestor or Adam of some
Mexican nations. The frogs were the
emblem of the Muyzcas!
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>31st Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guabonito</hi> a woman follows
<foreign rend='italic'>Guaga-Giona</foreign>
to the bigland of <foreign rend='italic'>Guanin</foreign>
by swimming. He is well pleased with it,
and calls her his own <foreign rend='italic'>Biberozi</foreign> (wife-loving):
but as she was diseased he puts her
apart in a <foreign rend='italic'>Guanara</foreign>, where she heals, and
he makes her queen.
</p>

<p>
A singular romantic fable, the disease of
the woman is stated to be the syphilis!
<foreign rend='italic'>Guabo-n'ito</foreign> means fruit or Guava pear of
man! The allegory implies another colony
following <foreign rend='italic'>Guaga</foreign>, not by swimming; but
with paddles or on rafts; probably a part
of the lesser tribe of <foreign rend='italic'>Amaiuna</foreign> or Amazons,
so often called women in antiquity; although
a powerful African people. All the women
left in the islands might be of such a tribe,
and since become the Mayas of Yucatan,
Hayti &amp;c., with the Manas or Manoas,
the Amazons of South America.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>32d Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Anacacugia</hi> (flower of Cacao)
brother of this wife or ally of <foreign rend='italic'>Guaga</foreign>,
runs away from him on the back of a manati
or seal, and goes back to the women of
Matinino.
</p>

<p>
This implies a separation of tribes, one
returning to the islands, where they probably
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
formed the Cairi nation. The seal used
for boats, is a third fable, found in Greece;
boats are thus compared to birds, opossums
and seals. Many American languages
animate boats and ships. This seal must
mean a <foreign rend='italic'>Manati</foreign>, or sea cow; real seals not
being found in the Antilles. If the name
was <foreign rend='italic'>Manati</foreign>, it
has affinities with the <foreign rend='italic'>Ama-yuna</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Ama-Zons</foreign> tribe.
<foreign rend='italic'>Ma-ti-ni-no</foreign>
is in Haytian <emph>great-mount-the-good</emph>, while
<foreign rend='italic'>Mana-ti</foreign> is
<hi rend='italic'>moving mountain</hi>. Has not
<foreign rend='italic'>Anacacu</foreign> a reference to
the <foreign rend='italic'>Anakim</foreign> of
Asia, the <foreign rend='italic'>Cacus</foreign> of
Europe, and the <foreign rend='italic'>Tam-anacu</foreign>
of South America?
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>33d Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hi-Auna</hi>
father of <foreign rend='italic'>Guago-giona</foreign>
comes with his son to the land of
Guanin, and being the grandfather of all
the tribes, they receive the names of <foreign rend='italic'>Hi-auna</foreign>;
which is afterwards changed to
children of Guanin. <foreign rend='italic'>Hin Gua-ili Gua-nin</foreign>
(the-plural such-children such-Nin), and
lastly the whole united nation is called
<foreign rend='italic'>Guanini</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
The Aones came then also to America,
and there was a confederacy of the tribes.
<foreign rend='italic'>Gua-gu</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Gua-go</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Gua-ga</foreign>, may be 3
spellings of a same name; but they might
also be three successive and distinct tribes
of <foreign rend='italic'>Giona</foreign>. <foreign rend='italic'>Gua-bonito</foreign>
in one instance is
made another lord or tribe, instead of a
wife of <foreign rend='italic'>Guago</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>34th Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Albebora</hi>
and his son <foreign rend='italic'>Al-bebora-El</foreign>,
were also Guanini lords or
Cazics, who came with the <foreign rend='italic'>Giona</foreign> tribe.
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
This indicates again another nation. The
name is remarkable, because it resembles
<foreign rend='italic'>Albion</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Bora</foreign>, two primitive nations of
the north, which settled England and the
boreal regions, becoming the Hyper-Boreans
of later times. Perhaps these Boras
are identic with the <foreign rend='italic'>Aboras</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Aboris</foreign> of
ancient Italy, the mountaineers since called
<foreign rend='italic'>Abori-genes</foreign> by the Greeks.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>35th Event.</hi> Another Guaga-giona II. or
<foreign rend='italic'>Guaba-giona</foreign> is mentioned afterwards,
whose son became the <foreign rend='italic'>Guanini</foreign> tribe.
</p>

<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Guaba</foreign> means both <emph>the father</emph>
and <emph>the Guava pear</emph>. The succession of these
<foreign rend='italic'>Gionas</foreign> is very obscure; but many are
probably omitted, and the whole poetical
records allude to the most famous of the
dynasty or nation. Guanini implies the
Golden tribe.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>36th Event.</hi> The settlement of the Guaninis
in Hayti was from Matinino and the
east; being exiled from Matinino, they are
led by <foreign rend='italic'>Camo</foreign> who begins the kingdom of
<foreign rend='italic'>Cabonao</foreign> in Hayti; they settle on the river
<foreign rend='italic'>Bahaboni</foreign>, where they built their houses,
and afterwards the great temple of <foreign rend='italic'>Camotzia</foreign>.
They gave to the island the name of
<foreign rend='italic'>Quisqueia</foreign> or great universe; but afterwards
<foreign rend='italic'>Hayti</foreign>, meaning land rough or hilly.
(Dangleria.)
</p>

<p>
This important event is best given with
those details by Dangleria: while Roman
appears to mix it with the settlement of Guanin.
Yet <foreign rend='italic'>Quisqueia</foreign> was more probably
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
the first name given to South America,
rather than to Hayti: another name for
which was <foreign rend='italic'>Bohio</foreign>
or habitations. <foreign rend='italic'>Camo</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Guamo</foreign> means
lord or master, <foreign rend='italic'>Tzia</foreign> is
temple. The exile of the Guaninis from
the islands, must allude to another revolution
and perhaps invasion. This <foreign rend='italic'>Camo</foreign>,
was probably the same as the <foreign rend='italic'>Cami</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Coma</foreign> of Cuba
in later time, <foreign rend='italic'>Comayagua</foreign>
of Honduras; which assimilate the first
civilized Haytians with the tribes of Central
America. It might have happened that
these <foreign rend='italic'>Camos</foreign>
were <foreign rend='italic'>Mayas</foreign> and the ancestors
of the <foreign rend='italic'>Mayo-riexes</foreign>. The history of
the Mayas of Otolum, and Central America,
will be connected with these annals
hereafter; but much is left for conjecture.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>37th Event.</hi> Other exiles of Matinino
settle at the island <foreign rend='italic'>Cabini</foreign> now Turtle island;
and near it on the north shore of
Hayti, from whence they spread through
the island, which is called <foreign rend='italic'>Bouhi</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Bohio</foreign>,
meaning full of towns.
</p>

<p>
Dangleria mentions this likewise. House
and town or habitation, are synonymous in
Haytian.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>38th Event.</hi> They found
some <foreign rend='italic'>Caracoles</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Taracolas</foreign>, crabs! or beastly men,
dwelling in the island. The <foreign rend='italic'>Guaninis</foreign>
wanting women, took some Caracols beasts
for wives, and made them suitable women,
by washing them, and giving them to eat
the fruit <foreign rend='italic'>Inriri Cahuvial</foreign>. This was done
by a <foreign rend='italic'>Vagoniana</foreign> II.
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
These Caracols had then survived the
flood or come before the Guaninis, the name
of the fruit that made them women, if explained,
might elucidate this event; but
the signification was not given; another
version will suggest other important analogies.<note place='foot'>But
Garcia gives a different version
of this fable, he says that the men being in
want of women sent 4 Caracols (their vassals?)
to catch wives, who were like ants
on trees; but slippery like eels: yet some
being caught became the wives of the
Guaninis. Ants were called <foreign rend='italic'>Comekhon</foreign>
in Haytian, and thus we have another tribe
akin to the <foreign rend='italic'>Comaguas</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Comayaguas &amp;c.</foreign>
who were previous settlers of Hayti, and
descendants of <foreign rend='italic'>Kon</foreign>!
the <foreign rend='italic'>Khons</foreign> of Lybia?
But it is strange that we find here the
<foreign rend='italic'>Myrmidons</foreign> of Grecian fable! and many
affinities in the name of that tribe of ants.
<foreign rend='italic'>Mur-mekon</foreign> in Pelagian
and Greek, <foreign rend='italic'>Umekon</foreign>
in Thracian, <foreign rend='italic'>Formica</foreign>
in Latin, <foreign rend='italic'>Camot</foreign>
in Bali, <foreign rend='italic'>Mohur</foreign> in Iran &amp;c., while in America
<foreign rend='italic'>Comagen</foreign> of Uraba,
<foreign rend='italic'>Camaxen</foreign> of the
Talascas and Opatas. All referring perhaps
to the ancient people of Ants; the
Pismires of Gothic tribes; a people of
dwarfs or weakness, akin to Pygmies and
Troglodytes! thus traced also to America.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>39th Event.</hi> These Caracols deprived of
their women, took other female beasts for
wives (another tribe) and from this union
most of the Haytians descended, becoming
<foreign rend='italic'>Anaborias</foreign> or vassals of the Guaninis.
</p>

<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Anaboria</foreign> means flower or lizard of labor!
these might be descended from <foreign rend='italic'>Albebora</foreign>.
This name for bondsmen, boors or
laborers, was widely spread in America,
and has affinities all over the world, even
with the Latin labor.<note place='foot'><p>Compare with
<foreign rend='italic'>Anaboria</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Naboritas</foreign>
(working men) the following names
for vassals and laborers&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>Naboriti</foreign> in
Coyba, <foreign rend='italic'>Labuyu</foreign> of Caribs,
<foreign rend='italic'>Anaconas</foreign> of
Peru and Muyzcas, <foreign rend='italic'>Naboria</foreign> of Mayas
&amp;c.&mdash;and in the east.
</p>
<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Tabara</foreign> in Turan.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Burutis</foreign> in Ausonian.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Aborian</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Abeirgon</foreign> Pelagic.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Boor</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Bura</foreign> Frisic.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Ambactos</foreign> in Gaul.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Manahunis</foreign> in Tahiti.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Nerba</foreign> Hindostani.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Bendar</foreign> Pehlvi.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Abondas</foreign> Saxon.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Canabas</foreign>, Knave Gothic.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Nebara</foreign> Nepal.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Parias</foreign> India.
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>40th Event.</hi> These first inhabitants of
Hayti, fed on dates, bananas, cocos, fruits,
nuts, herbs, yams, roots, onions, mushrooms:
until taught the use of Cazabi or bread by
<foreign rend='italic'>Boition</foreign>, with maize, cotton, mandioc &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Another fact of Dangleria, very natural
indicating the tropical food of old times.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>41st Event.</hi> <foreign rend='italic'>Michetauri Guauana</foreign>,
was the leader of the first colony to <foreign rend='italic'>Coaibai</foreign>
(death house) in the land of <foreign rend='italic'>Soraia</foreign> (setting
sun), and became the king of it. There
the people are called <foreign rend='italic'>Goeiz</foreign> (phantoms or
ghosts) and go about by night; but are not
dead people whose name is <foreign rend='italic'>Opia</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Coaibai</foreign> is either Cuba or Coyba in Darien,
or both. It became the paradise of
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
the Haytians, placed in Cuba or further
west, and a place of delight. The names
and allusions are remarkable. They assimilate
to those of the Greeks &amp;c. about
the fortunate islands of the west: those of
the Orientals and Hebrews about the island
<foreign rend='italic'>Elisha</foreign>, and
the <foreign rend='italic'>Sheol</foreign> or place of souls, the
Hebrew Plutonic region. <foreign rend='italic'>Soraya</foreign> for setting
sun, is identic with <foreign rend='italic'>Surya</foreign> of the Hindus:
whence came <foreign rend='italic'>Syria</foreign> the west, and
even our word <emph>sorrow</emph>; while <foreign rend='italic'>Sol</foreign> comes
from Sheol. <foreign rend='italic'>Azil</foreign> sun in Pelasgian, is akin
to <foreign rend='italic'>Elisha</foreign> whence our
word Azylum! <foreign rend='italic'>Goeiz</foreign>
is akin to ghost, <foreign rend='italic'>Ghaib</foreign>
in Syrian, <foreign rend='italic'>Coyocop</foreign>
of the Nachez, <foreign rend='italic'>Goz</foreign>
of the Vilelas. <foreign rend='italic'>Opi</foreign>
has affinities every where. <foreign rend='italic'>Michetauri</foreign> is
perhaps a synonym of <foreign rend='italic'>Machi-tuyra</foreign> great
devil, <foreign rend='italic'>Guauana</foreign> is such-Auna. Perhaps
this fable alludes to an anterior event and
the passage to America of a former Hi-Auna.<note place='foot'>It
is remarkable that the primitive
notions of the Haytians about ghosts &amp;c.
prevail yet among the Negroes of the Antilles.
The <foreign rend='italic'>Obiah</foreign> or
sortilege, and <foreign rend='italic'>Dupin</foreign>
ghosts, of Jamaica &amp;c., appear to have
survived. If introduced lately by the African
Negroes, it is strange they should be
similar to the Haytian names of old.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>42d Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Aumatex</hi> a great Cazic marries
the female Zemi <foreign rend='italic'>Guabanzex</foreign>, goddess
of waters and wind, and she has two sons
<foreign rend='italic'>Guatauva</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Pregonero</foreign>, who become
male Zemis.
</p>

<p>
It is impossible to say if this event belongs
to this time or to the cosmogony. I
presume it is historical, alluding to new
tribes, and perhaps foreign to Hayti. The
names are difficult to explain, nor is it
stated what these sons performed; but
being sons of water and wind, they must
have led colonies by sea elsewhere. They
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
are perhaps the ancestors of the Guataios
and the Puruays?<note place='foot'>The two brothers became gods of
good and evil, as their names indicate&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>Gua-tauva</foreign>
implies <emph>such goodness</emph>: while
<foreign rend='italic'>Pregonero</foreign> is the devil of Cumana, under
the names of <foreign rend='italic'>Proruru</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Proguro</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>43d Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Corocoro</hi> the quadruped
Zemi of the Caracols? was the ancestor
of two lines of kings, <foreign rend='italic'>Guamorete</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Guatabanex</foreign>,
who rule in Hayti. His temple
was in <foreign rend='italic'>Sacaba</foreign>, and his high-priest was
called <foreign rend='italic'>Cavava-Niovava</foreign>. Cave father and
our father.
</p>

<p>
This alludes to different tribes than the
Guaninis: <foreign rend='italic'>Coro</foreign> was a tribe in Cumana.
Perhaps this is another version of the
10th Event, or a proper indication of the
subsequent institutions of the Caracol nation,
when more civilized, and become the
Mayorex.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>44th Event.</hi> Arrival in Hayti, Cuba &amp;c.
of the first <foreign rend='italic'>Bohito</foreign> (old man), a priest and
legislator, called <foreign rend='italic'>Boition</foreign> by Dangleria,
meaning both <emph>Priest-solar</emph> and Old <foreign rend='italic'>Ion</foreign>: he
introduces agriculture and the use of bread,
divides the nation into 3 castes, <foreign rend='italic'>Tainos</foreign>, or
nobles, <foreign rend='italic'>Bohitos</foreign>
or priests, <foreign rend='italic'>Anaborias</foreign> or
vassals, and these last into tillers, hunters
and fishermen. He becomes pontif, settles
the religion; establishing mysteries and
oracles, the worship of Zemis, and many
other institutions, holydays, festivals, religious
dances, schools &amp;c., declaring the
land common to all, like the sun and water.
</p>

<p>
There are at least 3 Bohitos, that came
to Hayti and Cuba, and civilized the people;
but it is difficult to distinguish the
deeds of each. They were probably priests
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
leading more civilized colonies from the
east or from America. Their name which
is variously spelt or varies in dialects was
also <foreign rend='italic'>Buhuti</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Boitio</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Bauti</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Buhui</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Boyeto</foreign>
&amp;c., is akin to the <foreign rend='italic'>Boyez</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Poyes</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Piazes</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Payes</foreign>
of South America, used by
the Aruacs, Guaranis and Carib tribes,
<foreign rend='italic'>Piaches</foreign> of Tamanacs,
<foreign rend='italic'>Bauti</foreign> of Dabaiba,
<foreign rend='italic'>Papas</foreign> of Central
America, <foreign rend='italic'>Bochica</foreign> of
Muyzcas; but the names of priests all over
ancient eastern nations, have still more
analogies<note place='foot'><p>These priests drest in white as in
Central America, and the Druids; are
primitive Lybian or Druidic priests and
Pelagic Bramins. Their name is found in
</p>
<p>
<foreign rend='italic'>Hubantes</foreign> in Pelagic.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Faybo</foreign> of the Guanches.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Vates</foreign> Ausonian and Gaul.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Aobu</foreign> in Aramic.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Behotus</foreign> Dorian.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Bedo</foreign> old French.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Phonto</foreign> in Egypt.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Purohito</foreign> in Sanscrit.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Budan</foreign> in Pelvi.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Budha</foreign> of Budhists.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Baharas</foreign> Nepal.<lb/>
<foreign rend='italic'>Heotes</foreign> Sicanian &amp;c.
</p></note>&mdash;and therefore
they came from the east. The civilization
and religion introduced or improved
by them is also oriental; it was more advanced
than we are aware; since they had
ample fields and orchards, roads and canals,
schools in which they taught history, religion,
medicine and useful arts. Of their
astronomy nothing has been preserved, nor
of their hieroglyphs.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>45th Event.</hi> Bohito II.
or <foreign rend='italic'>Buhui-tihu</foreign>
(old eminent) comes and improves still further
the rites &amp;c., becoming high-priest.
He introduces medicines, charms, the use
of cotton and cloth, burning of bodies instead
of mummies as formerly, the holy
herbs <foreign rend='italic'>Gueyo</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Zochen &amp;c.</foreign>
</p>

<p>
This is all what can be collected on this
second law-giver, and he is even blended
with the next, except by name.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>46th Event.</hi> Bohito III.
or <foreign rend='italic'>Baio-habao</foreign>
(sea-lyre) comes next, introducing music,
sacred instruments called after him, and
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
probably the rites of the triple named god
of the Hindu and Mayan trimurti: <foreign rend='italic'>Bugia</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Aiba</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Bradama</foreign>: who became the
Zemi of war, or perhaps led to a war.
</p>

<p>
This god with three names is evidently
Vishnu, Shiba and Brama of India: found
in Yucatan as <foreign rend='italic'>Izona</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Echuah</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>Bacab</foreign>.
See my dissertation in Atlantic Journal, on
similar names of triple God all over America
and the east. It does not follow that
this worship came direct from India; but
it might come through the Pelagians, who
had it as <foreign rend='italic'>Bram</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Amen</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Vix</foreign>, inverted
among the Ausonians, Oscans. The same
about a god creator preserver and destroyer
was prevalent in Asia, Iran, Thibet, Syria,
Egypt, Greece, Etruria, and even the Canary
islands. The Mayoriex came probably
with Bohito III.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>47th Event.</hi> Happy state of this civilized
people, hardly knowing war, passing the
time in festivals, dancing, singing and making
love: whence called the Fortunate islands,
by the navigators that happened to go
so far. They dwelt in wooden houses and
had towns of 1000 houses.&mdash;Herrera.
</p>

<p>
This period is indicated by twenty authentic
sources of ancient history, and the
ancient traditions of Europe about the
happy land of the west, Elisha or Elysium,
Hesperides, Cocana of the Spaniards &amp;c.:
besides the happy state in which Hayti
was found.&mdash;See the account of the ancient
notions and communications with America,
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
and the great Atlantis: the most explicit is
found in Diodorus Siculus, as follows.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>48th Event.</hi> The Phenicians driven by
a storm, while going from Gades to Africa,
discover the large island <hi rend='smallcaps'>Atlantis</hi>, many
days in the ocean west of Lybia. It was
very fruitful, with mountains, large plains
and navigable rivers; with many woods
and fruits, fine valleys, plenty of wild beasts
and fish. The air is mild and healthful;
it is a residence fit for gods: the inhabitants
are a strong and healthful people; they
have many towns, with stately buildings,
houses of pleasures, gardens, orchards &amp;c.&mdash;Diod.
Book V.
</p>

<p>
The translators of Diodorus have blundered
so far as to deem this island Madeira
or the Canaries; which are small islands,
without streams, and the first without inhabitants.
It can only apply to Hayti, or
even the continent of South America.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>49th Event.</hi> <emph>A black people</emph> came to
Hayti from the south or south-east, who
had darts of Guanin metal, and were called
the Black Guaninis.
</p>

<p>
This tradition preserved by Herrera,
Garcia and Charlevoix, indicates a colony
of <emph>Negroes</emph> or men painting black, from
South America. They might be the black
Negroes of Quarequa mentioned by Dangleria,
or some other American Negro
nation, of which there are many.&mdash;See my
account of ancient Black Nations of America.
Dangleria mentions two wild tribes
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
of savages in Hayti towards 1500, one
speechless! (which means they spoke a
different language) probably a remain of
the Caracols, another swift dwelling in
caves, quite apart, seen in 1514 in Zauana
of Guacarima.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>50th Event.</hi> Navigations of the Haytians
and Cubans, settlements of the Lucayas islands,
Jamaica, and probably some parts of
Florida: mutual trade with Cuba and the
continent.
</p>

<p>
These colonial and trading voyages must
have begun long before and have been continual.
Columbus met individuals in Cuba
who had visited Hayti, Jamaica and Yamaya,
the Maya land or Yucatan. <foreign rend='italic'>Yucayas</foreign>
or Lucayans knew Cuba, Hayti and Florida,
which was called <foreign rend='italic'>Cautio</foreign> says Fulgar,
quoted by Cardenas, who deems the Antilles
peopled from hence, blending it with <foreign rend='italic'>Cauta</foreign>
the original seat of the Haytians. South
America was once called <foreign rend='italic'>Guanin</foreign>, afterwards
<foreign rend='italic'>Caribana</foreign> when it was overspread
by the Carib tribes. The Nachez appear
to have come from Cuba. The Cumanas
knew Hayti and called it <foreign rend='italic'>Atsi</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>51st Event.</hi> The
<foreign rend='italic'>Canibas</foreign> (whence our
Canibals) or the <foreign rend='italic'>Caribas</foreign>, (whence our
Caraibes), a savage people, often feeding
on human flesh, begin to spread to Guyana
and South America; becoming bold navigators
also, they send war parties and
colonies to the peaceful islands of the Antilles,
and even to Florida.
</p>

<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>

<p>
The Caribas evidently descended from
the Galibis, and other akin nations of South
America, did not originate in North America,
as supposed by Bridgstock and a few
others. Laborde who spent 20 years with
them, and knew well their language, has
published some of their traditions in 1704.
<foreign rend='italic'>Lon-quo</foreign> was their original god, who made
<foreign rend='italic'>Racumon</foreign> their chief or leader to America,
who leads there the tribes of snakes, men,
Cabatos-trees and birds. The true name
of the nation was <foreign rend='italic'>Cali</foreign>, those of the main
were <foreign rend='italic'>Cali-nago</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Calibis</foreign>, of the islands
<foreign rend='italic'>Cali-ponam</foreign>. Rochefort &amp;c.&mdash;See my
Carib Traditions.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>52d Event.</hi> The Calibis of Guyana after
long wars with <foreign rend='italic'>Alouague</foreign> the kings of the
<foreign rend='italic'>Aruacas</foreign>, send the
general <foreign rend='italic'>Timani</foreign> to
conquer the Aruacas Islanders, <foreign rend='italic'>Cahiris</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Eyeris</foreign> &amp;c. who
leads the tribe of <foreign rend='italic'>Labouyous</foreign>
(vassals) and conquer several islands,
killing the men and keeping the women.&mdash;Rochefort
&amp;c.
</p>

<p>
The period of this invasion is unknown;
those who bring the Caribs from North
America, make it much later of course;
but it is likely to be an old event: although
several invasions are probably meant and
blended. The <foreign rend='italic'>Timanis</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Labouyous</foreign>
must have effected this. They adopted
many customs and partly the religion of
the conquered women. The following tradition
belongs probably to the conquered
Eyeris.
</p>

<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>53d Event.</hi> Once when living wretched
and on the spontaneous fruits of the earth,
<foreign rend='italic'>Oubek-Eyeri</foreign> (heaven man) a holy man
drest all in white cotton, comes from heaven
(<foreign rend='italic'>Oubek</foreign> above). He first appears to
a desolate old man <foreign rend='italic'>Boyez</foreign>, and teach him
to build houses, to cultivate mandioc and
make bread of it &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
This must have been a priest or bohito
of Hayti, who tried to civilize the Caribs:
unless it refers to anterior traditions. He
taught religion also, that good men would
go after death to the happy islands of the
west, and become <foreign rend='italic'>Chemin</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Icheiri</foreign> Zemis;
while bad men should become <foreign rend='italic'>Oumekoua</foreign>
wanderers at sea, and <foreign rend='italic'>Mabouyas</foreign>
devils.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>54th Event.</hi> The Caribas in search of
these fortunate islands go to Hayti and
Cuba; but are repulsed, and settle in Florida,
where they extended inland, becoming
the tribes of <foreign rend='italic'>Cofachi</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Matica</foreign> and
<foreign rend='italic'>Amana</foreign>. They dwell there a long while
often at war with the Apalachis, who conquer
them and incorporate at last.
</p>

<p>
See Brigstock for this fact, and the wars
with the Apalachis; the details belong to
the history of North America and the nations
of Florida.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>55th Event.</hi> Some expelled Caribs hearing
by traders of Zigateo, steal some canos
and run away to this island, one of the
Lucayas; well received; but sent to Ayay
(Santa Cruz) desert island, where they
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
settle and increase. This happened towards
1150 of our era.
</p>

<p>
This positive fact begins the certain
chronology of the Antilles; but Brigstock
is quite wrong in deeming these fugitives,
the ancestors of all the Carib and Galibis
tribes as far as Brazil.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>56th Event.</hi> Civil wars in Hayti, attempt
of some kings to become independent from
the <foreign rend='italic'>Bohitos</foreign> government. The Cazic
<foreign rend='italic'>Guamaretus</foreign> despise his
god or Zemi <foreign rend='italic'>Corochotum</foreign>,
for which he is overcome in
battle and his palace burnt. Dangleria.
</p>

<p>
This indicates probably a revolution, and
attempt to overthrow the ancient religion,
perhaps before 1150.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>57th Event.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cazi-baquel</hi> restores peace,
and the worship of the great God <foreign rend='italic'>Jocavaghama</foreign>,
with the Zemi <foreign rend='italic'>Tarugavael</foreign> found
in the woods. Meantime the god <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jocava</hi>
prophecies by an oracle that the <foreign rend='italic'>Maguacochios</foreign>
(great people clothed) would come,
with fire and thunder to destroy or enslave
the rebellious Haytians. This was understood
to apply to the Caribs, and Spaniards
afterwards.<note place='foot'>The Caribs went nearly naked; when
the Spaniards came with clothes and guns
the prophecy was explained. <foreign rend='italic'>Cochio</foreign> for
dress and mantle has affinities with many
ancient languages, <foreign rend='italic'>Gonachen</foreign> in Iran,
<foreign rend='italic'>Ahico</foreign> of Guanches,
<foreign rend='italic'>Poncho</foreign> of Peru and
Chili, <foreign rend='italic'>Cachaca</foreign> of Gauls,
<foreign rend='italic'>Cochaya</foreign> of Slavonians,
<foreign rend='italic'>Cota</foreign> in Celtic &amp;c.: whence our
coat.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>58th Event.</hi> This great king <hi rend='smallcaps'>Baquel</hi>,
begins a dynasty, and has many successors
<foreign rend='italic'>Gamanacoel</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Guarionel</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Guayaronel</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Guavanenechin</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Guavavo-conel</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Caramarex</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Guaramatex &amp;c.</foreign>, who are the
chief kings of Hayti. <foreign rend='italic'>Guarionex</foreign> was his
successor when the Spaniards came.
</p>

<p>
The ancestors of Guarionex had been
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
kings or cazics from time immemorial in
the great kingdom and valley of Maguana,
180 miles long and 30 broad, running from
east to west; having from east to west the
provinces Canobocoa, Hubabo, Cayaba,
Maricoa, Bainoa. The river Bahuan runs
through it, which is probably the same as
Bahaboni, where settled the Guaninis.
They appear to have been at the head of
the feodal system of Cazics and Tainos
established in Hayti. All the other kings
bearing them allegiance: and their dialect
was the court language.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>59th Event.</hi> The island becomes divided
into 5 principal kingdoms, with many provinces
each having a Cazic. They were
1. <foreign rend='italic'>Caizimu</foreign> in the east with 11 provinces,
Higuey was the first of them, 2. <foreign rend='italic'>Bainoa</foreign>
in the centre, the largest of all, belonging
to the <foreign rend='italic'>Baquel</foreign> dynasty, with 24 provinces,
Maguana being the first of them, 3. <foreign rend='italic'>Guacarima</foreign>,
the west end, with 12 provinces,
Xaragua being the main, 4. <foreign rend='italic'>Hubaba</foreign>, a
small kingdom with 3 provinces in the
south mountains, 5. <foreign rend='italic'>Cotoy</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Cayabo</foreign> in
the mountains of the north, held by the
<foreign rend='italic'>Mayoriex</foreign> people, with 7 provinces, and
the mountains Zibao.
</p>

<p>
Dangleria gives the names of all these
provinces, but he has omitted the kingdom
of <foreign rend='italic'>Marien</foreign> in the north-west, he makes it
only a province of Bainoa. Laet, Charlevoix
and Munoz have given maps of old
Hayti, with the situations of many, the
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
rivers, towns, islands, mountains, lakes &amp;c.;
see my Ancient Geography of the Antilles.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>60th Event.</hi> Meantime Cuba was also
divided into 7 kingdoms, 1. <foreign rend='italic'>Mayzi</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Maiti</foreign>
opposite Hayti, 2. <foreign rend='italic'>Bayamo</foreign> west of it, 3.
<foreign rend='italic'>Cueyba</foreign> in the centre, whence the name of
<foreign rend='italic'>Cuba</foreign>, probably
the head kingdom, 4. <foreign rend='italic'>Camayegua</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Camaguey</foreign> inhabited by a
different people, famous tribe, probably
<foreign rend='italic'>Comayaguas</foreign> of Honduras, or Olmecas,
5. <foreign rend='italic'>Xagua</foreign> near the middle,
6. <foreign rend='italic'>Macaca</foreign> in
the south opposite Jamaica, 7. <foreign rend='italic'>Haniguanica</foreign>
at the west end where are the high
mountains <foreign rend='italic'>Uhima</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>61st Event.</hi> The island of Jamaica was
divided in two kingdoms. Boriquen also
Buchena or Burichina (D) now Porto-Rico,
formed one, but had 26 Cazics in as many
valleys, the high mountains of Guayamo
being desert. The <foreign rend='italic'>Yucayas</foreign> (white islands)
now Bahama, were numberless, the
largest being Amana, Zigateo, Bahama,
Bimini, Sumana, Yuma, Guanahani, Saomoto,
Abaco &amp;c. The Cazics were much
respected there, being also Bohitos or Behiques
(priests) judges and stewards. Labor
was in common and the daily food given
from the public stores. Some islands were
at war; but only used sticks in their quarrels.
Yet all the islands formed a single kingdom,
the great Cazic resided at Saomoto.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>62d Event.</hi> The Caribas of Ayay having
multiplied, spread again over the eastern
islands: they are repulsed in Boriquen;
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
but meeting their ancient tribes in <foreign rend='italic'>Curucueria</foreign>
now Guadeloupe: it becomes their
chief island: whence they send war parties
to 1000 miles off, even to the continent;
and occupy <foreign rend='italic'>Galana</foreign> now Marigalante,
<foreign rend='italic'>Matinino</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Madinino</foreign> now Martinique,
<foreign rend='italic'>Liamaca</foreign> now Antigua,
<foreign rend='italic'>Liamuiga</foreign> St.
Christopher, <foreign rend='italic'>Bayaraco</foreign>
St. Vincent, <foreign rend='italic'>Bequia</foreign>
Grenada &amp;c. called collectively <foreign rend='italic'>Caliaqua</foreign>
the islands of the Calibis.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>63d Event.</hi> They molest the shores of
Boriquen, where they are always repulsed,
but often steal men and children to eat
them.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>64th Event.</hi> They assail the shores of
Hayti, where they are much feared; signals
by smoke are made when they appear.
In Higuey and Caizimu, eastern regions of
the island, the Haytians become warlike to
defend themselves, and use poisoned arrows
as they did. Elsewhere the Haytians used
only darts, lances and macanas, peculiar
wooden swords.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>65th Event.</hi> The Caribs went as far as
the shores of Cuba, and desolated the south
shores: the Cubans removing their towns
inland. They were called Canibas and
Canimas: and succeed in forming a settlement
at Baracoa to the south-east.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>66th Event.</hi> They were repulsed in their
attempt against the warlike Jamaicans who
used arrows; they do not appear to have
molested the Yucayans, owing to their former
alliance and gift of the island Ayay.
</p>

<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>

<p>
These events are chiefly collected from
Columbus' own account, and personal narratives
of his travels, with other retrospective
hints by the Spanish writers. They
will also afford the notices of the subsequent
events.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>67th Event.</hi> The population of all the
Tainos in the Antilles was at least two
millions; 1,200,000 in Hayti; 600,000 in
Cuba; 100,000 in Boriquen; 60,000 in
Jamaica; 40,000 in the Yucayas; besides
the unknown Carib population.
</p>

<p>
This is the least calculation, at the Spanish
arrival: others have swelled it to 6
millions, including all the West Indies.
Las-Casas states that the Lucayas had
500,000, Jamaica and Boriquen 600,000.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>68th Event.</hi> The domestic animals of
these islands, were among beasts, Alco
dogs, gochi-dogs, agutis, cavias, pecari
hogs and manatis: turtles and guanas
among reptiles: parrots, doves, partridges,
fowls, ducks and red cranes among birds:
remoras among fishes; and even cucuyos
or fire flies used for lamps among insects.
</p>

<p>
Such were found either in one or all
the islands; which were not therefore destitute
of domestic animals, as commonly
believed. Columbus found tame fowls at
Cuba in 1492; which were probably the
Powis fowls.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>69th Event.</hi> Beroica was king of Jamaica
(about the year 1420) he began a
dynasty; his two successors were Bemberoica
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Abem-beroica</foreign>, meaning Beroica
II., Beroica III.
</p>

<p>
Garcia states this fact; but in 1503
Columbus found Ameyro Cazic of the east,
and Huarco of the west of Jamaica.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>70th Event.</hi> The island Puta or Cahiri
now Trinidad at the furthest east end of
the Antilles was still inhabited by several
Aruac tribes, Cahiris, Yaoy &amp;c. which
resisted the inroads of their constant foes
the Galibis and Caribas.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>71st Event.</hi> Between 1450 and 1480
Guaramatex was the greatest king and
Cazic of Hayti, in Bainoa and Maguana.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>72d Event.</hi> Cayacoa was king of Caizimu
and Higuey in the east from about 1460 to
1494 when he died.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>73d Event.</hi> About 1470 some Caribs
settle in Samana, the east peninsula of
Hayti; and two valiant brothers Caonabo
and Manicatex, form themselves a small
kingdom inland near to the Mayoriex nation,
Mayo-banex their king admits them
as allies. Caonabo conquers 3 provinces,
Dahabon, Zibaho and Manababo. He was
so much esteemed for his valor, that Anacoana
the Venus of Hayti, sister of the
king of Xaragua, becomes his wife soon
after.<note place='foot'>This is the most plausible account
of Caonabo; but he perhaps was a Maya
and not a Carib: his name is not Carib,
but Haytian, meaning <emph>gold of the house</emph>.
Anacaona would hardly have married a
Carib? I have attempted to put probable
dates to these retrospective events, loosely
mentioned by Dangleria and the Spanish
writers.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>74th Event.</hi> About 1475, Behechio is
king of Guacarima in the west, till 1500.
His capital was Xaragua. He became a
conqueror of several provinces, as far as
Neyba and Ozama rivers. He had 32 vassal
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
Cazics, and 30 wives, his favorite queen
was Guanahata.
</p>

<p>
Dangleria calls him Beuchicus Anaca-choa,
and says that as usual with great
kings, he received many titles, being called
Shining Copper, Bright Highness, and
Rich Flood. These titles were really
</p>

<lg>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Tureigua hobin</foreign>, Heaven-like of Yellow Copper.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Siarei-huibo</foreign>, Star-bright Highness.</l>
<l><foreign rend='italic'>Duyh-zinequen</foreign>, Wealthy in Streams.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>75th Event.</hi> In 1480 Guarionex succeeds
Guaramatex as the greatest king of Hayti.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>76th Event.</hi> In 1486 the Cubans send a
colony to Florida, in search of a river and
spring restoring to youth; they visit the
<foreign rend='italic'>Pola</foreign> islands, now Martyrs or Florida keys,
the <foreign rend='italic'>Colas</foreign> nation of South Florida, and
settle the town of Abaiba near the cape of
Florida.&mdash;Herrera.<note place='foot'>The intercourse between Cuba, Florida
and the Lucayas was frequent. Dangleria
says the Lucayas were a happy
people, with beautiful women, for whose
sake many Cubans and Floridans came to
live there.</note>
</p>

<p>
This proves a previous trade and knowledge
of Florida. The <foreign rend='italic'>Colas</foreign> are perhaps
descendants of the ancient Cara-<foreign rend='italic'>Cols</foreign> of
Hayti: they dwelt in Florida till 1760,
when they removed to Cuba.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>77th Event.</hi> In 1490 and previous to it,
war in Cuba between the kingdom of Cuba
or Colba, and Cavilla king of the <foreign rend='italic'>Cami</foreign>
nation, in the country of Bafan, whose
capital was Fava.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Columbus' Narrative.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Columbus heard of this war in 1492.
The <foreign rend='italic'>Cami</foreign> are the same as the Cama-yegua,
the foreign people of Cuba.<note place='foot'><p>It will be proper to recapitulate here
the ancient nations and tribes of the Antilles,
mentioned in these traditions and
annals; adding to each some well-known
modern nations of the continent, bearing
nearly the same name, and most probably
descended from them: unless it is preferred
to consider them as ancestors rather than
posterity, a very improbable fact. Meantime
we acquire thereby a new clue to
American annals and ethnology: since
nearly all the nations of America may be
connected with those by other links of
languages, traditions &amp;c.
</p>
<p>
1. <foreign rend='italic'>Zemis</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Chemes</foreign>, Compare Zemis and
Zemayos of Chaco and Chimus of Peru.
</p>
<p>
2. <foreign rend='italic'>Tuyras</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Taras</foreign>, Compare Tarascas
and Tarahumara of Mexico, Taricas and
Talas of Tucuman, Atures of Oronoc &amp;c.
</p>
<p>
3. <foreign rend='italic'>Guabanz</foreign>, Compare Abays and Abipons
of Chaco?
</p>
<p>
4. <foreign rend='italic'>Khayas</foreign>, Compare Cayubas and Khakhas
of Peru.
</p>
<p>
5. <foreign rend='italic'>Higueras</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Hibueras</foreign>, Compare Guaranis,
they called man <foreign rend='italic'>Ibi</foreign>, the Borias &amp;c.
</p>
<p>
6. <foreign rend='italic'>Boinis</foreign>, Bohanes of Charcas, and
names of priests in South America.
</p>
<p>
7. <foreign rend='italic'>Marohus</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Marocas</foreign>, Muras of Brazil,
Aymaras of Peru, Maronios of Charcas.
</p>
<p>
8. <foreign rend='italic'>Corocores</foreign>, Coretus of Brazil, Coras
of Peru, Coros of Cumana, Coras of Mexico.
</p>
<p>
9. <foreign rend='italic'>Coles</foreign>, probably same as Cores, Colas
of Florida, Collas of Peru, Chols of Central
America, Cholas of South America.
</p>
<p>
10. <foreign rend='italic'>Caracara</foreign> again same, Caras, Caris,
Carios of Guaranis and Peru, perhaps also
Caribs?
</p>
<p>
11. <foreign rend='italic'>Manicos</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Manacos</foreign>, the great
Nacos&mdash;Manicas or Manoas, Maynas of
Peru, Nacos of Comayagua.
</p>
<p>
12. <foreign rend='italic'>Icotas</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Hicoteas</foreign>, Cotos Carib
tribes.
</p>
<p>
13. <foreign rend='italic'>Cautas</foreign> appear same as
<foreign rend='italic'>I-cota</foreign>&mdash;<foreign rend='italic'>I</foreign>
and <foreign rend='italic'>Hi</foreign> are articles, Cotos and Cotas tribes
of Cumana and Oronoc.
</p>
<p>
14. <foreign rend='italic'>Caanau</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Caonas</foreign>, Cagnas, Canaris
of Peru.
</p>
<p>
15. <foreign rend='italic'>Giagau</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Xaguas</foreign>, Changas of Peru,
Achaguas of Guyana.
</p>
<p>
16. <foreign rend='italic'>Amayunas</foreign>, Mayoriexes of Hayti,
Mayas of Yucatan, Mbayas of Chaco.
</p>
<p>
17. <foreign rend='italic'>Machocha</foreign>, Machicuis of Charcas,
Chunchos of Peru.
</p>
<p>
18. <foreign rend='italic'>Zibas</foreign>, Zipas of Muyzcas, Shibaois
of Guyana.
</p>
<p>
19. <foreign rend='italic'>Khoboses</foreign>, Coropos of Brazil, Coybas
of Darien, Mocobis of Chaco.
</p>
<p>
20. <foreign rend='italic'>Gionas</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Aunas</foreign>, Yana-conas of
Peru.
</p>
<p>
21. <foreign rend='italic'>Kadrus</foreign>, Aruacs of Guyana.
</p>
<p>
22. <foreign rend='italic'>Giahubas</foreign>, Yaoys, Shiahubas and
Yahus of Guyana.
</p>
<p>
23. <foreign rend='italic'>Guaninis</foreign>, Guanas all over South
America.
</p>
<p>
24. <foreign rend='italic'>Tonas</foreign>, Atun-collas of Peru, Tuncas
of Popayan, Tun of Chili.
</p>
<p>
25. <foreign rend='italic'>Anacac</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Manati</foreign>, Tamanacus of
Guyana.
</p>
<p>
26. <foreign rend='italic'>Boras</foreign>, Anaborias of S. America.
Boroas of Chili.
</p>
<p>
27. <foreign rend='italic'>Comos</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Comis</foreign>
or <foreign rend='italic'>Come-Khon</foreign>, Comayaguas
of Honduras, Comagre of Darien,
Aculma of Mexico.
</p>
<p>
28. <foreign rend='italic'>Goeiz</foreign>, Goyaz of Brazil, Guyanas of
Oronoc.
</p>
<p>
29. <foreign rend='italic'>Aumatex</foreign>, Yumas, Yameos of Peru,
Amatalas of Moxos.
</p>
<p>
30. <foreign rend='italic'>Guatauvas</foreign>, Guatayos or Aruac
tribes.
</p>
<p>
31. <foreign rend='italic'>Moretes</foreign>, Muretes of Moxos? Muras
of Brazil.
</p>
<p>
32. <foreign rend='italic'>Caribas</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Canibas</foreign>,
<foreign rend='italic'>Canimas</foreign>, The
Calibis or Caribs.
</p>
<p>
33. <foreign rend='italic'>Timanis</foreign>, Timanas of Chaco, Tamanacs
and Tamecas of Oronoc.
</p>
<p>
34. <foreign rend='italic'>Labouyous</foreign>, Abuyas and Abayes
synonym of Mbayas.
</p>
<p>
35. <foreign rend='italic'>Cahiris</foreign> Caris of South America.
</p>
<p>
36. <foreign rend='italic'>Eyeris</foreign>, Yaros of Parana.
</p>
<p>
37. <foreign rend='italic'>Toas</foreign>, Taos of Tucuman, and of New
Mexico.
</p>
<p>
38. <foreign rend='italic'>Oumekwas</foreign>, Omaguas, Humayons of
Chaco &amp;c.
</p>
<p>
39. <foreign rend='italic'>Mabuyas</foreign>, Abuyas, Poyas, Poyay of
North and South America.
</p>
<p>
40. <foreign rend='italic'>Cofachis,</foreign> Cofachis or Cowetas of
North America?
</p>
<p>
41. <foreign rend='italic'>Apalachis</foreign>, Apalaches, Yamasis of
North America.
</p>
<p>
42. <foreign rend='italic'>Mayoriex</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Ziguayos</foreign>, Mayas,
Guayos of Chaco.
</p>
<p>
43. <foreign rend='italic'>Cons</foreign>, Chons and Yana-Conas of
Peru, Conos of Chaco, Conivos and Conamas
of South America.
</p>
<p>
44. <foreign rend='italic'>Els</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Ili</foreign>
(children), Eles and Ols
of Mexico, Yoales or Vilelas and Lules or
Pelé of Chaco.
</p>
<p>
Thus, how gratuitous was the common
opinion that only one nation filled the Antilles.
Meantime we find nowhere in these
annals that name of Antilia, which in their
language would have been <foreign rend='italic'>Anti-ili</foreign> sons of
Antes, or <foreign rend='italic'>Ana-ti-ili</foreign> flower-high-children.
It may be a Lybian name like Atlantes, both
referring to the <foreign rend='italic'>Antis</foreign> or Anteus, the early
inhabitants of North Africa, and of Peru.
</p></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter VII.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>The Haytian or Taino Language</hi> <hi rend='italic'>restored,
with fragments of the dialects of
Cuba, Jamaica, Lucayas, Boriquen,
Eyeri, Cairi, Araguas. Grammar,
roots, and comparative Vocabularies.</hi>
</quote>

<p>
At an early period I endeavored to collect
all the scattered fragments of this language,
in order to elucidate and support
the historical traditions. This labour concluded
in 1828, has given very important
results, which shall now be explained. At
the time of the Spanish discovery and conquest,
many Spaniards spoke that language;
many slaves were sent to Spain; but philology
was not then attended to. Therefore
we have no dictionary nor grammar of this
language. Meantime the very nation has
disappeared, destroyed by Spanish cruelty.
</p>

<p>
However, nearly all the early travellers
and writers on the West Indies have preserved
by chance, some words of it. Columbus
himself mentions some of them in
his original journal. Roman and Dangleria
explain many of the quoted words. Others
are scattered in Acosta, Gomara, Oviedo,
Garcia, Diaz, Las-Casas &amp;c.; which had
never been all collected even by Vater nor
Edwards. Gili alone undertook to give a
long list of Haytian words; but three-fourths
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
of them are geographical or historical names
unexplained and unavailable.
</p>

<p>
I have used, compared and brought together
all these loose materials, and thus
succeeded in restoring about 234 words of
this language, a list ample enough for all
historical purposes. This contains besides
50 words of the Eyeri and eastern dialects,
with 38 of the Cuban or western dialects,
useful to show the variations of dialects.
We know that from Bahama to Cuba,
Boriquen to Jamaica, a same language
was spoken in various slight dialects, but
understood by all: Columbus himself says so.
</p>

<p>
But this language, which had also partly
spread in Florida, and in South America,
has the appearance of being a mixt speech.
This appears from the many synonyms, the
deviations of dialects, and the double forms,
or relative position of words. In the small
eastern islands the <hi rend='italic'>Eyeris</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Cabres</hi> had
been destroyed by the Caribs, who preserved
the women, and these preserved their own
language, mixt with some Carib words and
taught it to their daughters; so as to produce
a double language, that of the women
being quite peculiar. This singular fact
well authenticated, will enable us to presume
a similar conquest and custom, wherever
we shall meet in America, with a peculiar
female idiom.
</p>

<p>
The many nations or tribes mentioned
in the traditions, which had gradually amalgamated;
and the settlement in Cuba and
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
Hayti of the Mayas, will account for this
mixture of synonyms. But the existence
also of many homonyms, leads us to a former
more simple speech, probably monosyllabic
and quite regular as the oriental idioms, to
which it is most akin.
</p>

<p>
From the primitive languages of North
Africa and South Europe, it had received
this regular position of ideas; but by the
mixture with the Maya and Mexican nations
using the inverse form, it borrowed
that new form. The same happened in
Europe to the Celtic and Oriental tribes,
who received in Greece and Italy the inverse
form of speech from the Scythian,
Illyrian and Gothic tribes.
</p>

<p>
The comparative examination of the
Haytian and dialects, was pursued by me,
<hi rend='italic'>upon all the languages of the earth</hi>, as I
was determined that one American nation
at least, should be traced philologically to
its real origin. Thus I found many thousand
analogies of it, out of which I have
used about 1500 in the annals, notes and
vocabularies. A single American language
does then contain more comparative analogies
in about 200 words than all those collected
by Vater and Malte, out of 400
American languages; and this fact upsets
all the illusions, theories and false views,
based thereon by them, Humboldt and
others.
</p>

<p>
But this comprehensive labour teaches
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
other facts, by far more important and
available. 1. That American languages
have analogies with all the languages of
the earth, 2. That they have similar analogies
with each other, 3. That it is only the
superior number of analogies that may indicate
a filial or parental connection out
of America, 4. And that also similar greatest
number of analogies, indicate the parental
relations of American languages and
nations between themselves, 5. Lastly that
unless a language and nation is compared
<emph>with all the others</emph>, we can never ascertain
accurately, nor trace its real parentage
philologically.
</p>

<p>
This consequence is obvious, although it
will not please the lazy or timid philologists
and historians. It shall be further pursued
and elucidated hereafter; but now let us
apply these rules to the Haytian.
</p>

<p>
I could give 400 comparisons. Let us
select a few.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>Ainu of Choka</hi> islands between Japan
and <hi rend='italic'>Kamchatka</hi>, 22 comparable words 4
alike in Haytian&mdash;Boat, house, no, drink&mdash;Mutual
affinity only 21 per cent. No parentage.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Singala</hi> of Ceylon, 50 comparable
words, 16 analogies, with Haytian&mdash;Mutual
affinity 32 per cent. Very distant parentage.
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>Guanch</hi> of the Canary island nearest
to Hayti in the east, 32 comparable words,
14 akin. Mutual affinity 42 per cent.
Distant connection.
</p>

<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>Mandara.</hi> Handsome black nation
in the centre of Africa, 12 words comparable,
6 akin,&mdash;one, water, man, king, mother,
river&mdash;Mutual analogies 50 per cent.
Nearer connection than with the Guanch,
or separation less remote.
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>Pelagic</hi>, or ancestors of the Greeks
and Italians. Comparable words in all the
ancient and modern dialects nearly 200,
whereof about 160 offer more or less analogies!&mdash;Mutual
affinity 80 per cent! Complete
and near connection.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Therefore the Haytians are of Pelagic
origin!</hi> No other group of languages offer
anything like as many. The nearest after,
are the Atlantic L. Lybian, Egyptian, Bask,
Sanscrit, Persian &amp;c. who are all connected
with the Pelagic nations. The analogies
with the Tartars, Chinese, Polynesians &amp;c.,
are all less in amount.
</p>

<p>
In America the Haytian affinities are of
course the greatest with the <hi rend='italic'>Aruac</hi> nations
of South America; who are their brothers,
and extend to the Taos of Tucuman and
the Tinguis or true Patagons of Pigafetta.
Yet they may have been divided long ago,
or ever since their American settlement:
since out of two selected for comparisons,
after the vocabularies, the <hi rend='italic'>Araguas</hi> had
only 70 per cent of analogy, and the <hi rend='italic'>Cairi</hi>
only 56 per cent. The nearest affinities
after these, were with the <hi rend='italic'>Apalachis</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Nachez</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cadoz</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Huastecas</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mexican</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Tarasca</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Maya</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Chontal</hi> &amp;c. of N. America,
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
and the <hi rend='italic'>Darien</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Betoy</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Peruvian</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Chili</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mbaya &amp;c.</hi> of South America.
</p>

<p>
Those with the nations of N. America of
Asiatic origin, and the nations of South
America of African origin, such as the
Linapis and Guaranis, were much reduced.
See the compared vocabularies.
</p>

<p>
The Haytian shall now become therefore
one of the touchstones of other American
languages, to verify their eastern or Atlantic
origin, and above all the connection
with the American Pelagians.
</p>

<p>
Let us now consider the forms and peculiarities
of this interesting language, and
first its phonology.
</p>

<p>
It appears to have all the sounds of the
Italic languages; but it lacks the Greek
TH, PS, the Cairi had <hi rend='italic'>TH</hi>. It has been
written by Spaniards, and their simple orthography
applies well to it; but leaves a
doubt whether it had the Celtic and French
û (unless it be y) Hebrew and English SH,
lacking in Spanish. Their CH is as in
English, and the French TCH.&mdash;It had
the gutural X of the Greeks and Spanish,
written X and J. Also the Spanish LL,
GN or Ñ, and TZ.
</p>

<p>
It had few P being changed to B; few
F often changed to V; few L changing to
Y; few S changed to Z; few D changed
to T.&mdash;It had no nasal sounds as in Italian,
AN becoming <hi rend='italic'>Ana</hi> &amp;c. Many dipthongs
AO, OEI, IA, AI, UA, AU, EI &amp;c. as in
Italian, each vowel sounded. This made
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
the language soft, pleasing and musical as
in Italian and Polynesian. Dangleria says
the accent was always on the last syllable,
as in French.
</p>

<p>
On the grammar of it, nothing has been
written; what Vater has said is quite loose
and inaccurate. We have not even the
<hi rend='italic'>Lord's Prayer</hi> in it, so as to serve as a
model. Our only guides are a few translated
phrases of Roman and Dangleria;
but they enable us to perceive the main
features of it.
</p>

<p>
One of the chief was the great use of
articles, as in Italian; but with a peculiar
one GUA, put commonly before, but sometimes
after the nouns. It was a demonstrative
article, meaning <hi rend='italic'>such</hi>, or
<hi rend='italic'>this</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>that</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>these</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>those</hi>; but never changing and common
as our <hi rend='italic'>The</hi>: while this indicative <hi rend='italic'>The</hi>
was declinable or changing as in the Italic
languages, and extremely various, although
always prefixed, expressed by I, HI, HIN,
NI, N', ZI, LI &amp;c. A third kind of article
was O, which when added, appears to
have been comparative, and to mean <hi rend='italic'>Akin</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Like</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Similar</hi>, or our English AS. The
relative article <hi rend='italic'>Of</hi> was A prefixed.
</p>

<p>
Examples of Articles.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gua-yava</hi> This pear.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gua-ma</hi> This great, or lord.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gua-tiaos</hi> Those brothers.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ma-za-gua</hi> Great plain such.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bala-gua</hi> Sea such, the ocean.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>I-Guana</hi> The guana or lizard.</l>
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ni-taino</hi> The good or noble.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Mi-taino</hi> My noble lord.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Li-ani</hi> The wife. Eyeri dialect.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hin-Guaili</hi> The such-sons, the children.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ziba o</hi> Stone like, stony.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>A-na</hi> Of bloom, a flower.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>A-boria</hi> Of labor, a vassal.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>A-maca</hi> Of wood, a bed.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>A-ma</hi> Of great, water.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>A-reiti</hi> Of rite, song.</l>
</lg>

<p>
These articles formed probably the declinations
of nouns, as we do not perceive
a different desinense. This form was more
like the Celtic, Oscan, and Greek, than the
Latin.
</p>

<p>
The feminine was formed nearly as in
Italian, O changing to A.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Taino</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Taina</hi>,
Lord, Lady&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hito</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hita</hi>, Man, Woman;
but there must have been irregularities
difficult to trace: as some words masculine
end in I, S, N, U, L. Perhaps some were
neutral.
</p>

<p>
Some words are formed by duplication,
implying an amplitude, as in the Oriental
language.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bi</hi> life,
<hi rend='italic'>Bibi</hi> mother and wife
in dialects. <hi rend='italic'>Ba</hi> habitation,
<hi rend='italic'>Baba</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Vava</hi>
Father. <hi rend='italic'>Ma</hi> great,
<hi rend='italic'>Mama</hi> mother. <hi rend='italic'>Xau</hi>
cake, <hi rend='italic'>Xauxau</hi> bread or large cake.
</p>

<p>
The plurals are chiefly in I as in Italian,
or in S as in Spanish; but there are some
irregular plurals. <hi rend='italic'>Taino</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Taini</hi>, Lord,
Lords. <hi rend='italic'>Hito</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>hitos</hi> man, men.
</p>

<p>
EL son. ILI sons. <hi rend='italic'>Zemi</hi> angel, <hi rend='italic'>Zemes</hi>
angels.
</p>

<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>

<p>
The Eyeri dialect forms many plurals in
UM. <hi rend='italic'>Eyeri</hi> man, <hi rend='italic'>Eyerium</hi>
men; <hi rend='italic'>Inaru</hi>
woman, <hi rend='italic'>Inayum</hi> women.
</p>

<p>
The adjectives are put before or after
the substantives, blending the two forms;
and the prevailing form in compound words
is doubtful, perhaps the regular as in Latin.
</p>

<p>
Examples of regular position.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hay-ti</hi> Land-high.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ana-caona</hi> Flower (of) gold.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Buhui-tihu</hi> Priest high or eminent.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Examples of inverse positions.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bo-hito</hi> Old man or priest.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Jaya-el</hi> Earth-son.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>N'abor-itas</hi> The working men.</l>
</lg>

<p>
The adjectives are chiefly formed from
nouns, and often by a simple O added, thus
<hi rend='italic'>Ziba</hi> stone, <hi rend='italic'>Zibao</hi>
stony, <hi rend='italic'>Zibayo</hi> mount.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Turei</hi> heaven, <hi rend='italic'>Tureigua</hi> heavenly or
heaven-like.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Duhos</hi> wealth, <hi rend='italic'>Duihzi</hi> wealthy or
wealth-is.
</p>

<p>
The superlatives are commonly formed
by duplication. <hi rend='italic'>Ua</hi> old, <hi rend='italic'>Uaua</hi> very old.
<hi rend='italic'>Co</hi> fruitful, <hi rend='italic'>Coco</hi> very fruitful, the coco
nut.
</p>

<p>
Or else by the affix <hi rend='italic'>Ma</hi> which amplifies
every thing.
</p>

<p>
The pronouns appear very simple.
</p>

<p>
MI, M' first person for I, me, my, mine;
but <hi rend='italic'>our</hi> is <hi rend='italic'>Ahia</hi>?
</p>

<p>
TI, T' Second person for thee, thou, thy,
thine.
</p>

<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>

<p>
LI, L' Third person for he, she, his, her.
</p>

<p>
NI, N' Common like <hi rend='italic'>It</hi> or rather <hi rend='italic'>On</hi> of
the French.
</p>

<p>
How their plurals are formed, is doubtful;
but perhaps the inflexions alone formed
them. These pronouns are pure Italian!
or rather primitive. They were often dispensed
with as in Italian.
</p>

<p>
Of the verbs we know little or nothing.
By a few examples of the verb <hi rend='italic'>to be</hi>, it was
quite irregular as with us.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ei</hi> To be&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Tei</hi>
be thou&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bei</hi> being.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Beira</hi> a being&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Dacha</hi> I am.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>El</hi> he is&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Zi</hi> it is, this is.</l>
</lg>

<p>
In these <hi rend='italic'>Ei</hi> appears the root, derives
from <hi rend='italic'>Eil</hi>, and was then similar to <hi rend='italic'>El</hi> son,
as <hi rend='italic'>Zi</hi> to <hi rend='italic'>Izi</hi> eyes.
</p>

<p>
This verb joined to others was added to
words. <hi rend='italic'>Guarocoel</hi> we know he is, may be
analyzed <hi rend='italic'>Gua-roco-el</hi> such-know-he-is.
</p>

<p>
We have an example of negative verbs
in <hi rend='italic'>Macabuca</hi> I do not care, which is <hi rend='italic'>Macabuca</hi>
not-care, or never-mind; in French
<hi rend='italic'>n'importe</hi>, in Italian <hi rend='italic'>non curo</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Of the syntax we may form an idea by
the few preserved phrases; which I have
analyzed as follow, and compared with the
Italian.
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. <hi rend='italic'>Teitoca</hi> thou be quiet.
<hi rend='italic'>Tacitu</hi> Italian.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>tocheta</hi> much. <hi rend='italic'>molto.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>zinato</hi> angry.
<hi rend='italic'>irato.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Guame-chyna</hi> this
great God. <hi rend='italic'>gran-Nume.</hi></l>
</lg>

<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>

<lg>
<l>2. <hi rend='italic'>Gua-ibba</hi> that go. <hi rend='italic'>Vai</hi> It.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>zinato</hi> angry. <hi rend='italic'>irato.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>macabuca</hi> not care. <hi rend='italic'>non curo.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3. <hi rend='italic'>Dios</hi> Spanish God. <hi rend='italic'>Dio</hi> It.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Aboria</hi> Servant. <hi rend='italic'>Servo.</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>dacha</hi> I am. <hi rend='italic'>Sono.</hi></l>
</lg>

<p>
This idiom or position of words is perfect
in Italian which admits of many transpositions;
but in English syntax and idiom
these phrases mean
</p>

<lg>
<l>1. Be quiet, God will be very angry.</l>
<l>2. Begone, I do not care if he is angry.</l>
<l>3. I am the servant of the Spanish God.</l>
</lg>

<p>
The Haytian numbers have not been
transmitted to us, and I could only collect
the following secondary numbers&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ata</hi>
first, <hi rend='italic'>Bem</hi> second, <hi rend='italic'>Abem</hi> third: which
however are primitive and indicate a binary
numeration: although the language
had probably the decimals.
</p>

<p>
By a careful analytical process I have
been able to decompose the compound
words, and even reach their monosyllabic
roots. All the long words can be thus
analyzed, and show that this compound
form only arises, as usual in American
languages, by the blunders of the Spanish
writers, who wrote long words instead of
short ones; blending articles and affixes.
The Haytian thus analyzed and reduced
is a very simple language, approximating
to the primitive and oriental forms, wherein
short monosyllables of generic import,
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
formed the base of the speech, and became
modified by union and relative position.
</p>

<p>
By these means the following essential
roots of the language have been collected,
and are given to help future similar investigations
of American languages.
</p>

<p>
Examples of composition.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cazabi</hi> Bread.
<hi rend='italic'>Ca-za-bi</hi> soil-fruitful-life.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Manati</hi> Sea cow.
<hi rend='italic'>Ma-na-ti</hi> great-thing-eminent.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Turei</hi> Heaven. <hi rend='italic'>T'ur-ei</hi> Thou-light-be.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Furzidi</hi> Cloudy. <hi rend='italic'>Fur-zi-di</hi>
gloom-it-is-day. (or now)</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Areiti</hi> Song, rites. <hi rend='italic'>A-rei-ti</hi>
of reality eminent.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Nanichi</hi> Soul. <hi rend='italic'>Na-ni-chi</hi>
thing the active.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Maroyo</hi> Moon. <hi rend='italic'>Ma-ro-yo</hi> great lovely.</l>
</lg>

<p>
74 essential monosyllabic roots of this
language or genera of ideas.
</p>

<lg>
<l>A, Of, as, like.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ac</hi>, Holy, sacred, religious.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Am</hi>, Water, root, plenty.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>An</hi>, Male thing, man, people, folk.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>At</hi>, One, alone, first, unic.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ba</hi>, Father, ancestor, dwelling.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Bal</hi>, Raft, floating, wave, sea.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ban</hi>, Wind, air.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Bao</hi>, Music, lyre, instrument.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Bat</hi>, Beating, game, play, ball.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Bem</hi>, Second, double, twin, two, next.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Bi</hi>, Life, wife, mother.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Boa</hi>, Habitation, house.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Bor</hi>, Labor, work, vassal, service.</l>
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ca</hi>, Land, soil, earth, dry.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Can</hi>, Fish, swift, bad.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Chi</hi>, Active, soul, work, wine, lively.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Chon</hi>, Hot, dry, fever.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Chuc</hi>, Take, grasp, hold.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Co</hi>, Soil, fruitful, fountain, dog, thread.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Coai</hi>, Joy, delight, happiness.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cu</hi>, Chapel, altar, hearth, fire, all.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cus</hi>, Worm, creeping.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Di</hi>, Day, now, actual.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Duh</hi>, Wealth, riches, treasures, property.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ei</hi>, Existence, to be.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>El</hi>, Son, tribe, child, he is.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Fur</hi>, Gloom, dark, cloud, fury.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Gia</hi>, Fowl, bird, flying.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Gua</hi>, Such, this, that, these, those.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Guey</hi>, Shell, hollow, closed.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ha</hi>, Yes, sure, certain.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Hi</hi>, The, indication, here.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Hio</hi>, House, hut, cottage.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Huib</hi>, Head.</l>
<l>I, The, sign of life and action.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Io</hi>, God, the living-type.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>It</hi>, Man, male.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>In</hi>, Woman, female.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Iz</hi>, Eyes, looks.</l>
<l>L', LI, He, she, they, his &amp;c., oft. changed to Y.</l>
<l>MA, Great, big, larger, increase, mothers, water &amp;c.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Mas</hi>, Food, to eat &amp;c.</l>
<l>MI, M', Me, my, mine.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Na</hi>, Thing, bloom, lizard.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ni</hi>, N', The thing, my thing.</l>
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>No</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Noa</hi>,
Boat, navigation, noble.</l>
<l>O, Like, similar, akin.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ob</hi>, Copper, yellow.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Op</hi>, Dead.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Pu</hi>, Wood, purple.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ra</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Rei</hi>, Real, rite, evidence,
offspring.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ris</hi>, Red.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ro</hi>, Love, belove.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ri</hi>, Male, people, men.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Sor</hi>, West, Eve, late, far.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Toa</hi>, Breast, milk.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ti</hi>, High, lofty, eminent.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Tab</hi>, Tube, pipe.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Tai</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tiao</hi>, Brother, friend,
good.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Toc</hi>, Rest, peace, quiet.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ua</hi>, Old, ancient.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ur</hi>, Light.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ut</hi>, Rabbits.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Va</hi>, Cave, hollow, father, origin.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Var</hi>, War, warrior.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Xau</hi>, Cake, baked, bread.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Xi</hi>, Strong, pungent, pepper.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Yar</hi>, End, tail, vent.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Yu</hi>, White, bright.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Za</hi>, Grass, fruitful, plenty.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Zem</hi>, Angels, deities, idols.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Zib</hi>, Stone, rock.</l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Zic</hi>, King, ruler.</l>
</lg>

<p>
Such was the Haytian language, once
spoken by several millions, and a western
branch of the Pelagic stock; that derived
from the Asiatic <hi rend='italic'>Pelegs</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Palis</hi>, once
peopled nearly all the shores of the Mediterranean
3 or 4000 years ago.
</p>

<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>

<p>
The following comparative vocabularies
will prove this fact. They have not been
made to support it; but to find the truth,
and the probable ancestors of this American
nation, by seeking them all over the
earth. If this nation one of the nearest to
the eastern hemisphere, is thus found of
such remote antiquity, those further removed
and inland may well be deemed
equally old, or rather older still: which
their own history shall disclose.
</p>

<p>
Out of the 234 words collected; many
it will be perceived, are hardly comparable;
being names of peculiar animals and plants.
About 200 offer comparisons with our languages
well known. It must be remarked
that the Spaniards borrowed many Haytian
words, which have since been introduced
into Spanish and other European languages.
Humboldt has given a list of them. Those
admitted in the English language now are,
hurricane, canoe, keys or islands, tobacco,
pimento, yam, tomato, cassava, savana,
mahogany, patatas, mangrove, indigo, copal,
maize, bananas, parrot, guano, coco,
cacao, guava, hammock or hanging bed &amp;c.;
which must not be compared, since they
have been borrowed by us from the Haytian.
The Spaniards have besides, chichas,
balza, Cazic spelt cacique, aguti, manati,
maguey, tiburo, guayac, macana, bejuco,
nigua, tuna, aji, zeyba, &amp;c.
</p>

<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>

<p>
Yet several of those words may be usefully
compared in ancient languages often
extinct, previous to the late connection
with America. Thus we find analogies
for maize, canoe, cazic, cayman, yam,
chicha, macana, manati &amp;c., in many: indicating
very ancient connections.&mdash;Even
the words manati, hurricane, canoe, nigua
&amp;c., have affinities in modern Italic languages,
not derived from Hayti.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Comparative</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Taino</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Vocabulary of
Hayti.</hi>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Authorities</hi>,&mdash;R. Roman&mdash;C. Columbus&mdash;D.
Dangleria,&mdash;Ac. Acosta,&mdash;Her.
Herrera,&mdash;M. Munoz,&mdash;L. Las-Casas,&mdash;O.
Oviedo,&mdash;G. Garcia or Gili,&mdash;E. Edwards,&mdash;H.
Humboldt,&mdash;V. Vater,&mdash;A. all
or nearly all of them,&mdash;Laet,&mdash;Diaz,&mdash;St.
Mery,&mdash;Ey. Eyeri Dialect.
</p>

<p>
All or whole <hi rend='smallcaps'>Quis</hi> R. D. Xus O.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Analogies, <hi rend='italic'>Oya</hi> Congo, <hi rend='italic'>Jikoga</hi>
Japan, <hi rend='italic'>Chukoat</hi> Nepal,
<hi rend='italic'>Huy</hi> Copt, <hi rend='italic'>Qualunque</hi>
Italy.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ixquich</hi> Mexican, <hi rend='italic'>Kiyih</hi>
Mohigan &amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
Angel and Idol. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zemi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Zemes</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Chemes</hi>
A. analogies in annals.
</p>

<p>
Alligator or crocodile. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cayman A.</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Caram</hi> Bornu, <hi rend='italic'>Taymah</hi> Arabic,
<hi rend='italic'>Cuina</hi> Bechuana,
<hi rend='italic'>Caimio Chamoa</hi> Egyptian
Dialects.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cayman</hi> Peruvian,
<hi rend='italic'>Camac</hi> Mexican, <hi rend='italic'>Amangam</hi> Linapi.
</quote>

<p>
Ants or pismires <hi rend='smallcaps'>Comexon R.</hi> see notes.
Apple, pear, guava. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guava</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Guaiva</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Guayaba</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Xagua A.</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Apis</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Puar</hi>, old French,
<hi rend='italic'>Apple</hi> English, <hi rend='italic'>Aguas</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Carba</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Carpos</hi> Greek,
<hi rend='italic'>Carpath</hi> Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Ribi</hi> Egypt.
</quote>

<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>

<p>
Angry <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zynato</hi> D.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Irato</hi> Ital, <hi rend='italic'>Orgytheis</hi>
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Cato</hi> (bad) Ausonian,
<hi rend='italic'>Yahat</hi> Malay, <hi rend='italic'>Ita</hi> Tonga.
</quote>

<p>
Am, I am <hi rend='smallcaps'>Dacha</hi> D.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Nach</hi> Turan, <hi rend='italic'>Da</hi>
(is) Bask, <hi rend='italic'>Davo</hi> Sanscrit.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Naca</hi>
Maipuri, <hi rend='italic'>Ehaca</hi> Tarasca.
</quote>

<p>
Arachis or ground-nut. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mani</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Manis</hi>
A.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Nux</hi>
Latin.
</p>

<p>
Aloe <hi rend='smallcaps'>Maguey</hi>. Magheih H.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Agave</hi>
Greek.
</p>

<p>
Annona or Papaw <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guanavan</hi> H.
</p>

<p>
Ananas or pine-apple <hi rend='smallcaps'>Boniama</hi> G.
<hi rend='italic'>Fanpolomi</hi>
E.
</p>

<p>
Annato or red paint <hi rend='smallcaps'>Achioto</hi> H. <hi rend='italic'>Bixa</hi> G.
</p>

<p>
Apart, aside, the side <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nara</hi>
R.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Parte</hi>
It., <hi rend='italic'>Share</hi> English &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Armadillo <hi rend='smallcaps'>Atatu</hi> E.
</p>

<p>
Army <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guaravara</hi> G., see War.
</p>

<p>
Air, see Wind.
</p>

<p>
Above <hi rend='italic'>Ubek</hi> in Eyeri. <hi rend='italic'>Super</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ubique</hi>,
Latin.
</p>

<p>
Breast and milk <hi rend='smallcaps'>Toa</hi> R&mdash;primitive word
found in all languages,&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Teth</hi> Celtic, <hi rend='italic'>Tit</hi> Saxon,
<hi rend='italic'>Tad</hi> Chaldaic, <hi rend='italic'>Toho</hi> Ainu,
<hi rend='italic'>Aha</hi> (milk) Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Aho</hi>
Guanche, <hi rend='italic'>Tea</hi> Bisharis, <hi rend='italic'>Doa</hi>
Hindu &amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
Bread or cake <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cazabi</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Cazavi</hi> A. <hi rend='italic'>Cuac</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Maru</hi> in dialects.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Also primitive found in 100 languages. <hi rend='italic'>Oguia</hi> Bask,
<hi rend='italic'>Ahran</hi> Celtic and Berber, <hi rend='italic'>Shakua</hi>
Abask, <hi rend='italic'>Kabaka</hi>
Nuba, <hi rend='italic'>Khas</hi> Haikan, <hi rend='italic'>Maru</hi>
Zingani, <hi rend='italic'>Yacu</hi> Dhagul
mountains, <hi rend='italic'>Axaus</hi> Pelagic,
<hi rend='italic'>Artos</hi> Greek &amp;c.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cuzavi</hi>
Tayrones, <hi rend='italic'>Cosque</hi> Chili,
<hi rend='italic'>Casaah</hi> Cado, <hi rend='italic'>Cancu</hi> Peru,
<hi rend='italic'>Shokua</hi> Atakapas, <hi rend='italic'>Pasca</hi> Apalachi &amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
Be, to be, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tei</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ei</hi> D.&mdash;Primitive.
</p>

<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Ei</hi> Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>E</hi>
Italic, <hi rend='italic'>Hei</hi> Arabic, <hi rend='italic'>Eu</hi> Armoric,
<hi rend='italic'>Hei</hi> Oscan, <hi rend='italic'>Esti</hi>
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>E</hi> Haikan, <hi rend='italic'>Hein</hi> Pelagic,
Eolian, <hi rend='italic'>Pet</hi> Egypt &amp;c.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Eini</hi>
Tarasca, <hi rend='italic'>Atz</hi> Chaymas
&amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
Being, and a being, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bei</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Beira</hi> A.&mdash;primitive,
same roots,
</p>

<p>
Boat, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Canoa</hi> A. <hi rend='italic'>Pages.</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Primitive word of 100 languages, <hi rend='italic'>Nau Sanscrit</hi>, Pelagic,
Osset, <hi rend='italic'>Nave</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Barca</hi>
Italic, <hi rend='italic'>Naus</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Guyon</hi>
Guanch, <hi rend='italic'>Scafo</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cahekiu</hi>
Sicilian, <hi rend='italic'>Xepec</hi> Lybian, <hi rend='italic'>Bacolo</hi>
Illyric, <hi rend='italic'>Cahani</hi> Ainu, <hi rend='italic'>Cayic</hi>
Turk, <hi rend='italic'>Doa</hi> Arabic,
<hi rend='italic'>Naos</hi> Haikan, <hi rend='italic'>Ani</hi>
Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Cana</hi> Bastul or Iberian,
<hi rend='italic'>Naoi</hi> Celtic, <hi rend='italic'>Kan</hi>
Teutonic &amp;c.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Noatek</hi> Mbaya,
<hi rend='italic'>Canahua</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Canabir</hi>
Galibis, <hi rend='italic'>Palayak</hi> Aleutian, <hi rend='italic'>Banias</hi>
Panama &amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
Bird, fowl, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bogiael</hi> R. <hi rend='italic'>Ipis</hi>
in Cuba.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Compare <hi rend='italic'>Halit</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Ibis</hi>
Egypt, <hi rend='italic'>Pirid</hi> old Saxon,
<hi rend='italic'>Ipira</hi> Hindu, <hi rend='italic'>Vogel</hi>
German, <hi rend='italic'>Pollo</hi> Oscan. <hi rend='italic'>Ugedu</hi>
Sicily, <hi rend='italic'>Ogia</hi> Celtic, <hi rend='italic'>Uchel</hi>
Ausonian, <hi rend='italic'>Bo</hi> Burman,
<hi rend='italic'>Mapel</hi> Suanic, <hi rend='italic'>Haliga</hi>
Pelagic &amp;c.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Gualpa</hi> Peru,
<hi rend='italic'>Coxol</hi> Huasteca &amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
Bed. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Amaca</hi> A. <hi rend='italic'>Amazas</hi>
L. <hi rend='italic'>Barbacoa</hi>
H. <hi rend='italic'>Nehera</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nekera in Dialects</hi>.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Ekia</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kunera</hi>,
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Tamapat</hi> Malay, <hi rend='italic'>Nedokuri</hi>
Japan, <hi rend='italic'>Cama</hi> Lusitanian, <hi rend='italic'>Make</hi>
Egypt&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Camata</hi> Peru,
<hi rend='italic'>Amaca</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Akat</hi> Galibi,
<hi rend='italic'>Mucara</hi> Betoy? <hi rend='italic'>Amaca</hi> Yaoy,
<hi rend='italic'>Chinchero</hi> Guarauna.
</quote>

<p>
Blue and violet, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tunna</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Quibey</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Guei</hi>,
dialects.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cyanus</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Chuanta</hi> Abask.
</p>

<p>
Beer, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Chicha</hi> A.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Alicha</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cheruisa</hi> Gauls,
<hi rend='italic'>Chelia</hi> Cantabrians, <hi rend='italic'>Chacoli</hi>
Bask, <hi rend='italic'>Shashu</hi> China, <hi rend='italic'>Ichua</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Isua</hi> African Atlantes,
<hi rend='italic'>Acha</hi> (Wine) Aramic&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Chica</hi>
Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Chicha</hi> Chili,
Mbayas, <hi rend='italic'>Cachina</hi> Apalachi,
<hi rend='italic'>Huicu</hi> Galibis &amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
Beloved, loved, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Rozi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Berozi</hi> R.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Eros</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Behar</hi> Persian,
<hi rend='italic'>Careich</hi> Celtic, <hi rend='italic'>Cara</hi>
Italic and Hebrew, <hi rend='italic'>Heri</hi> Sanscrit,
<hi rend='italic'>Eiras</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Meres</hi> Egypt,
<hi rend='italic'>Amore</hi> Italian, <hi rend='italic'>Amuri</hi> Sicilian.
</quote>

<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>

<p>
Ball, ball-game, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Batos</hi> D. <hi rend='italic'>Batei</hi> G.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Orpatos</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Ballota</hi>
Italic, <hi rend='italic'>Baton</hi> French, <hi rend='italic'>Bandy</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Bate</hi> old English&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Pali</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Palican</hi> Chili.
</quote>

<p>
Beast, beastly, wild, <hi rend='italic'>Caracol</hi> R.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Caracal</hi> Lybian, <hi rend='italic'>Car</hi>
Turan, <hi rend='italic'>Heraca</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ferua</hi> Italy,
<hi rend='italic'>Caracol</hi> Berber Atlantes, <hi rend='italic'>Caracoler</hi>
old French, <hi rend='italic'>Ho-lo</hi>
old Chinese, <hi rend='italic'>Olo-olo</hi> Bugis and Macasar.
</quote>

<p>
Basket, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hava</hi> G.&mdash;Primitive, see Cave.
</p>

<p>
Bright, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tureigna</hi> D.&mdash;see Light.
</p>

<p>
Bananas, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bananas</hi> Her. <hi rend='italic'>Camois</hi> G.
</p>

<p>
Bad fellow, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Vaquiano</hi> Ac.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Paquiano</hi>
Sicily.
</p>

<p>
Brother, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guatiao</hi> Her.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Tayo</hi>
Polynesia,
<hi rend='italic'>Fratielo</hi> Ital. D.
</p>

<p>
Blood, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Moinalu</hi> Ey.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Omoina</hi> Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Idoimen</hi>
African Atlantes, <hi rend='italic'>Odola</hi>
Bask, <hi rend='italic'>Zemo</hi> Zend, <hi rend='italic'>Tola</hi>
Arabic, <hi rend='italic'>Haimai</hi> Pelagic,
<hi rend='italic'>Haematos</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Aimonos</hi>
Romaic, <hi rend='italic'>Hamanos</hi> Illyric,
<hi rend='italic'>Mulu</hi> Koriak and Kamchatka.
</quote>

<p>
Corn, maize, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mahiz</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mayz</hi> A.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Maiza</hi> Bask. <hi rend='italic'>Mas</hi>
Nepal and Congo. <hi rend='italic'>May</hi> Kirata of
Imalaya, <hi rend='italic'>Me</hi> Chinese, <hi rend='italic'>Maza</hi>
Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Maiz</hi> Turan,
<hi rend='italic'>Zimidi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Zimind</hi>
Caucasian languages, <hi rend='italic'>Mozen</hi> Guanch,
<hi rend='italic'>Tiemzin</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>timezin tomzin</hi>
African Atlantic&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hazez</hi>
Apalachi, <hi rend='italic'>Iziz</hi> Huasteca,
<hi rend='italic'>Zara</hi> Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Yasit</hi> Cora,
<hi rend='italic'>Umita</hi> Chili.
</quote>

<p>
Cold, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ymizui</hi> R.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hima</hi>
Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Hiems</hi>
Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Frimat</hi> French.
</p>

<p>
Cave, cavern, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cova</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Vava</hi> D. <hi rend='italic'>Giaga</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Beina</hi> O.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Cava</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cabina</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Phinon</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Caura</hi>
Lybian, <hi rend='italic'>Thebi</hi>
old Egyptian, <hi rend='italic'>Tabaita</hi> Ausonian,
<hi rend='italic'>Ketena</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Phian</hi> Oscan
and Etruscan? <hi rend='italic'>Libanah</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cuena</hi>
Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Tana</hi>
Sicily, <hi rend='italic'>Deina</hi> Teuton ... Primitive.
</quote>

<p>
Cotton, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mapu</hi> E. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zeiba</hi>
A.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Gosupon</hi>
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Kapas</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kipi</hi> Sanscrit language,
</p>

<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bombaz</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Cosib</hi> old Arabic.
</p>

<p>
Cloth, see dress.
</p>

<p>
Club, see sword.
</p>

<p>
Copper, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tuob</hi> C. Yellow copper,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hobin</hi>
D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Kuop</hi> Pelagic,
<hi rend='italic'>Kupros</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Cupreus</hi>
Latin.
</p>

<p>
Careless, I don't care, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Macabuca</hi>
D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bucanaco</hi>
Congo.
</p>

<p>
Cutting, knife, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Henequen</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ecuta</hi>
Bask,
<hi rend='italic'>Totenika</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Sikunatant</hi>
Pehlvi, <hi rend='italic'>Kangiac</hi>
Arabic &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Children or tribe, EL, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ili</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Guaili</hi> R.&mdash;Primitive,
analogies already given in annals.
</p>

<p>
Clusia alba, or copal tree, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Copei</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Copal</hi>
G. H.
</p>

<p>
Conch-shell, <hi rend='italic'>Maguey</hi> C. as Aloe.
</p>

<p>
Cake, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Xauxau</hi> G. <hi rend='italic'>Akes</hi> C. see Bread.
<hi rend='italic'>Xau</hi> is primitive.
</p>

<p>
Cocos, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Coco</hi> G. <hi rend='italic'>Coquillas</hi> in Boriquen.
</p>

<p>
Cedar, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cauvana</hi> G.
</p>

<p>
Cacao, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cacao</hi> A. same in Mexico &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Church, temple, chapel, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cu</hi>
Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>Tzia</hi>.&mdash;Primitive,
same name in Maya, Chontal,
Mexican &amp;c. <hi rend='italic'>Gu</hi> Japan, <hi rend='italic'>Tia</hi> Chinese D.
</p>

<p>
Cloudy, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Furzidi</hi>, Her.
</p>

<p>
Cane, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yaruma</hi>, Her.
</p>

<p>
Crabs, <hi rend='italic'>Taracolas</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Grankio</hi> Italian,
<hi rend='italic'>Harkinos</hi> Greek.
</p>

<p>
Dress, mantle, cloth, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cochio</hi> D. R. <hi rend='italic'>Yaguas</hi>
Her.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Ahico</hi> Guanch, <hi rend='italic'>Haico</hi>
Berber, <hi rend='italic'>Cachaca</hi> Gaul, <hi rend='italic'>Cochaya</hi>
Slavonian&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Poncho</hi> Chili, <hi rend='italic'>Cuayo</hi> Galibi.
</quote>

<p>
Danse and song, rites and worship <hi rend='smallcaps'>Areitos</hi>
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
A., <hi rend='italic'>Areites</hi> D., <hi rend='italic'>Areiti</hi>
G., <hi rend='italic'>Batocos</hi> G.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Iroitos</hi> sacred songs of Greeks,
<hi rend='italic'>Ticos</hi> Illyrian, <hi rend='italic'>Artesis</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Orchesis</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Xoreite</hi>, danses of Pelagians and
Greeks, <hi rend='italic'>Ariette</hi> (song) French
and Ital., <hi rend='italic'>Hurah</hi> Saxon,
<hi rend='italic'>Ahura</hi> Havay&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Yaravis</hi>
Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Mitotes</hi> Mexican.
</quote>

<p>
Dog, <hi rend='italic'>Cuchis</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Gochis</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Alco</hi> (a peculiar
kind.)&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Khoy</hi> Caucasus, <hi rend='italic'>Cunis</hi>
Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Kiuen</hi> China, <hi rend='italic'>Chiu</hi>
Mungur of Nepal, <hi rend='italic'>Chien</hi> French,
<hi rend='italic'>Cucus</hi> Persian, <hi rend='italic'>Cucura</hi>
Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Cucha</hi> Newar,
<hi rend='italic'>Cuxur</hi> Nepal, <hi rend='italic'>Cuncha</hi>
Guanch Atlantes, <hi rend='italic'>Cuch</hi> Curdish,
<hi rend='italic'>Cho</hi> Siam&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Chichi</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Alco</hi> Mexican, <hi rend='italic'>Chegua</hi>
Chili, <hi rend='italic'>Cule</hi> Lule, <hi rend='italic'>Allco</hi> Peru,
<hi rend='italic'>Vichu</hi> Tarasca.
</quote>

<p>
Day, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Di</hi>&mdash;Primitive
<hi rend='italic'>Dies</hi> Latin and all
Pelagic languages.
</p>

<p>
Daughter, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Rahen</hi> Ey.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Chera</hi> Copt, <hi rend='italic'>Ahu</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Raena</hi> Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Nuora</hi>
Italic&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ninah</hi>
Darien, <hi rend='italic'>Tahira</hi> Omagua.
</quote>

<p>
Dead, ghost, spirit, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Opia</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Opoyem</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Goeiz</hi>.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Boa</hi> old Ethiopic, <hi rend='italic'>Aporoya</hi>
Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Iya</hi> Bishri,
<hi rend='italic'>Obit</hi> Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Leoba</hi>
Irish, <hi rend='italic'>Zabi</hi> Bask, <hi rend='italic'>Obiah</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Oabye</hi>,
Africans&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Pitini</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Conopas</hi>
Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Ho</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Obihi</hi> Othomi,
<hi rend='italic'>Maboya</hi> Galibi, <hi rend='italic'>Chipi</hi> Ottawa.
</quote>

<p>
Devil and Evil, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tuyra</hi> D., see Annals.
<hi rend='italic'>Mabuya</hi> Eyeri is Carib.
</p>

<p>
Eternal, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mamona</hi> R. <hi rend='italic'>Jemao</hi>, title of God,
see Annals.
</p>

<p>
Earth, land, and island, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jaya</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Khaya</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Cayos</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hay</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Guaca</hi> &amp;c. A.&mdash;Primitive,
see Annals.
</p>

<p>
Eat, to eat, food, to feed, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Imas</hi>, Mani A.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Mets</hi> Celtic, <hi rend='italic'>Yam</hi>
Slavic, <hi rend='italic'>Jian</hi> Bask, <hi rend='italic'>Ishamas</hi> Kamchatka,
<hi rend='italic'>Macanu</hi> Malay, <hi rend='italic'>Uem</hi> Copt,
<hi rend='italic'>Mas</hi> Sanscrit and
Thibet, <hi rend='italic'>Mashu</hi> Nepal&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Micuni</hi> Peruvian.
</quote>

<p>
End, tail, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yarima</hi> D.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Uras</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Ora</hi>
Anglo-Saxon, <hi rend='italic'>Gomera</hi> Aramic,
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
<hi rend='italic'>Oari</hi> Japan, <hi rend='italic'>Ura</hi>
Manchu, <hi rend='italic'>Brim</hi> Teutonic&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Yara</hi>
Tarasca.
</quote>

<p>
Emerald, gem, and money, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Aguacat</hi>,
O.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Achates</hi>
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Agata</hi> Latin &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Eyes, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Izi</hi>, O.&mdash;Primitive,
<hi rend='italic'>Mizi</hi> in Polynesia,
<hi rend='italic'>Opsis</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Aiz</hi>
English, <hi rend='italic'>Iz</hi> Oriental
language&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cosi</hi> Cahiri.
</p>

<p>
Field, plain, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Conuco</hi> G. V.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zavana</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Zanaga,
Mazagua</hi>, A.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Khana</hi> Pehlvi, <hi rend='italic'>Bashan</hi>
old Arabic, <hi rend='italic'>Chonu</hi> Yakut,
<hi rend='italic'>Azagar, Zahal, Caha, Amaza</hi>, African
Atlantes, <hi rend='italic'>Coy</hi>
Copt, <hi rend='italic'>Ager</hi> Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Kuni</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Nabeku</hi> Iberian Spanish&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cog</hi>
Guarani, <hi rend='italic'>Cu</hi> Omaguas, <hi rend='italic'>Tzallan</hi> Huasteca.
</quote>

<p>
Fly, flying-insect, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cocuyo</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cuinix</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Zievas</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Huica</hi>
Pelagic, Cuic Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Musca</hi>
Latin.
</p>

<p>
Fountain, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Coa</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Maca</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mini</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cum</hi>
Hindi, <hi rend='italic'>Ain</hi> Arabic, <hi rend='italic'>Hecoas</hi> Pelagic.
</p>

<p>
Frog, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Toa</hi> G. Onomatopeia.
</p>

<p>
Father, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ahia</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Baia</hi>, R.,
<hi rend='italic'>Vava</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Baba</hi> Ey.&mdash;Primitive,
found in 500 languages.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Bap</hi> Lybian, <hi rend='italic'>Ibas Babas</hi>
of atlantes, <hi rend='italic'>Ab</hi> Oriental Lang,
<hi rend='italic'>Pa</hi> Thibet, <hi rend='italic'>Yaya</hi>
Kawi, <hi rend='italic'>Babo Avo</hi> Italy, <hi rend='italic'>Ayenl</hi> French,
<hi rend='italic'>Ay</hi> Votiac and Edda, <hi rend='italic'>Oaba</hi>
Abase, <hi rend='italic'>Aita</hi> Bask; <hi rend='italic'>Ba
Ab Baba</hi>, Sanscrit; <hi rend='italic'>Bay</hi>
Jolof.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Yaya</hi> Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Iyay</hi>
Taos, <hi rend='italic'>Haia</hi> Sheba, <hi rend='italic'>Ochai</hi>
Yaqui, <hi rend='italic'>Yapa</hi> Cora, <hi rend='italic'>Lahai</hi>
Cochimi and Lamones, <hi rend='italic'>Ahay</hi> Eslen,
<hi rend='italic'>Aoy</hi> Eclemac,
<hi rend='italic'>Aya</hi> Yarura, <hi rend='italic'>Yai</hi>
Zamuca, <hi rend='italic'>Ahen</hi> Yameos, <hi rend='italic'>Yare</hi> Puri,
<hi rend='italic'>Baba</hi> Saliva, <hi rend='italic'>Papa</hi> Tamanac and Cuna, etc.
</quote>

<p>
Frolic, Intoxication.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Barbasco</hi> St.
Mary, <hi rend='italic'>Frasco</hi> Sicilian.
</p>

<p>
Fish, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ican</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Guaycan M</hi>.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Ihan</hi> Malay, <hi rend='italic'>Icthos</hi> Greek,
<hi rend='italic'>Guiena</hi> Iolof, <hi rend='italic'>Nga</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Gna</hi>
Limbua and Newar of Nepal, <hi rend='italic'>Piscan</hi>
Oscan, <hi rend='italic'>Ica</hi> Tonga
and Nukahiva, <hi rend='italic'>Sakana</hi> Japan,
<hi rend='italic'>Iguah</hi> Java,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Yacun</hi>
Wokon, <hi rend='italic'>Hucat</hi> Cora, <hi rend='italic'>Makach</hi> Nachez.
</quote>

<p>
Fire, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cuyo</hi> D, <hi rend='italic'>Cuxo</hi> H.&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Ecu</hi> Hottentot, <hi rend='italic'>Cuat</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Taquat</hi> afr Atlantes, <hi rend='italic'>Guy</hi> Kawi,
<hi rend='italic'>Koke</hi> Coptic, <hi rend='italic'>Ogiak</hi> Turk,
<hi rend='italic'>Cuasi</hi> Japan, <hi rend='italic'>Fuyo</hi> Iberian,
<hi rend='italic'>Fuoco</hi> Italy, <hi rend='italic'>Ucut</hi>
Moluccas.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Totecuh</hi> Muscolgi, <hi rend='italic'>Cu</hi>
Sussih, <hi rend='italic'>Icu</hi> Lulè, <hi rend='italic'>Eguza</hi>
Saliva, <hi rend='italic'>Yucu</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Xucu</hi> Moxas,
<hi rend='italic'>Cutha</hi>, Chili, <hi rend='italic'>Cuyah</hi>
Malali, <hi rend='italic'>Cuati</hi> Sapibo, <hi rend='italic'>Kueh</hi> Taculis.
</quote>

<p>
Fire-fly, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cucuyos</hi> G.
<hi rend='italic'>Cucuyo</hi> H. <hi rend='italic'>Locuyos</hi>
H. <hi rend='italic'>Cucuix</hi> D. <hi rend='italic'>Zievas</hi> in Lucayas O.
see Fire and Fly.
</p>

<p>
Foe, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Anaki</hi> O. <hi rend='italic'>Akani</hi> Ey.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Katahi</hi> Japan, <hi rend='italic'>Neikos</hi>
(strife) Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Uaina</hi> Slavic,
<hi rend='italic'>Vahini</hi> Sanscrit,
<hi rend='italic'>Katalki</hi> Kendy, <hi rend='italic'>Anakim</hi> Aramic,
<hi rend='italic'>Acanitu</hi> Sicilian, <hi rend='italic'>Nemico</hi> Italian.
</quote>

<p>
Flower, Blossom, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ana</hi> A.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Anu</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mana</hi>, Egypt,
<hi rend='italic'>Anota</hi> Singala, <hi rend='italic'>Anathos</hi> Greek,
<hi rend='italic'>Suan</hi> Newar, <hi rend='italic'>Athina</hi>
Palo, <hi rend='italic'>Tana</hi> Japan, <hi rend='italic'>Dani</hi> Othomi.
</quote>

<p>
Fruit. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Inas</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guauanas</hi>,
Ac.&mdash;Derived
from Flower.
</p>

<p>
Fruitful Co.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Com</hi> Iberian, <hi rend='italic'>Comestible</hi>
French.
</p>

<p>
Fever, see heat.
</p>

<p>
Flamingo, Red bird. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ipiris</hi> Diaz in Cuba.
</p>

<p>
God. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jovana</hi> O. <hi rend='italic'>Yocahuna</hi> R. and
many other names and titles in all the Islands.
See the annals and notes. All are
compound primitive words: additional analogies.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Jan</hi> Janus of Etruscans,
<hi rend='italic'>Ju</hi> Ombrian, <hi rend='italic'>Yu</hi> Ausonian,
<hi rend='italic'>Jovis</hi> Latin,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Jona</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Yauna</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Juncva</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Jaungoieva</hi> of
Basks&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Jo-cauna</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Janum</hi> of Lybians, IEUE of Moses,
<hi rend='italic'>Joh</hi> Luchu, <hi rend='italic'>Yavang</hi> Sunda,
<hi rend='italic'>Iona</hi> Troyan, <hi rend='italic'>Iunak</hi>
Slavic, <hi rend='italic'>Achaman Ahican</hi> Guanch,
&amp;c.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Yah</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>yoha
vah</hi> Chactah, <hi rend='italic'>Hioh</hi> New Albion,
<hi rend='italic'>Yaho</hi> Apalachi, <hi rend='italic'>Oyuac</hi>
Old Peruvian, <hi rend='italic'>Jahuagon</hi> Huron,
<hi rend='italic'>Wakon</hi> Ozages,
<hi rend='italic'>Conome</hi> Yaruras,
<hi rend='italic'>Oho</hi> Aleutian, <hi rend='italic'>Ogha</hi> Othomi, &amp;c.
</quote>

<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>

<p>
Great, Big, Large. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ma</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Magua</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Guama</hi>,
A.&mdash;Primitive, akin to all old Languages,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Magnus</hi> Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Megas</hi>
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Ma</hi> Oriental and Sanscrit
Languages, <hi rend='italic'>Masa</hi> Pehlvi,
<hi rend='italic'>Mese</hi> Zend, <hi rend='italic'>Maha</hi>
Hindu and Bali, <hi rend='italic'>Maque</hi> Jolof,
<hi rend='italic'>Maunu</hi> Fulah, <hi rend='italic'>Mah</hi>
Iran, <hi rend='italic'>Mag</hi> Medic and Irish,
<hi rend='italic'>Guadul</hi> Phenician, <hi rend='italic'>Maigh</hi>
Celtic, <hi rend='italic'>Magla</hi> Carthuli,
<hi rend='italic'>Waka</hi> Japan.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ecuah</hi> Tzuluki,
<hi rend='italic'>Gua</hi> Nachez, <hi rend='italic'>Guazu</hi>
Guarami, <hi rend='italic'>Zhuma</hi> Muyzcas,
<hi rend='italic'>Ma</hi> Apalachi, <hi rend='italic'>Manaho</hi> Othomi.
</quote>

<p>
Green. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Huarahua</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Guaragua</hi> Laet.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Xloris</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Viridis</hi>
Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Huryo</hi> Nepal,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Veragua</hi>
Chontal.
</quote>

<p>
Gold. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Caona, Cauni</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Canchana</hi> Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Sona</hi>
Hindu, <hi rend='italic'>Kin</hi> China, <hi rend='italic'>Sanu</hi>
Manding, <hi rend='italic'>Sun</hi> Nepal, <hi rend='italic'>Cancha</hi>, Peru.
</quote>

<p>
Go and Come. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ha.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Guaiba</hi> D.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Odebo</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Amòular</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Va</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Vaya</hi> Italic D,
<hi rend='italic'>Hanba</hi>
Cosa afr, <hi rend='italic'>Ya</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Gati</hi>
Sanscrit,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hoye</hi> Tarahumara,
<hi rend='italic'>Hupua</hi> Yaqui, <hi rend='italic'>Aya</hi>
Chactah, <hi rend='italic'>Hai</hi> Patagon, <hi rend='italic'>Auha</hi>
Aleutian.
</quote>

<p>
Gourd. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Higuera</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Hibuera</hi>
D. O. <hi rend='italic'>Hibue
ra</hi> M.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Guara</hi> Bask, <hi rend='italic'>Cucurbita</hi> Latin.
</quote>

<p>
Gentle, mild, tame. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Matum</hi> D. <hi rend='italic'>Boniatum</hi>
O.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Manso</hi> Italy, <hi rend='italic'>Matio</hi>
(Foolish,) <hi rend='italic'>Amato</hi> (beloved), <hi rend='italic'>Bonus</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>mitis</hi> Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Gathos</hi> Greek.
</quote>

<p>
Guitar, Lyre. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Habao.</hi> R.&mdash;
<hi rend='italic'>Hiuhaba</hi> Bask, <hi rend='italic'>Chobao</hi>
Hindi, <hi rend='italic'>Balajo</hi> Jolof, <hi rend='italic'>Oboe</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Hinoa</hi> Italic D.
</p>

<p>
Garden, Delight, Joy, Happiness. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Coai</hi>
R. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Chali</hi> Ey.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Lali</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Loula</hi> Egypt,
<hi rend='italic'>Chagla</hi> Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Shali</hi> Cashmir,
<hi rend='italic'>Shialar</hi> Sicily, <hi rend='italic'>Gala</hi>
Italy, <hi rend='italic'>Yaul</hi> Scand, <hi rend='italic'>Hali</hi> Zend,
<hi rend='italic'>Coya</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Noali</hi>
Armoric,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Quali</hi> Mexican,
<hi rend='italic'>Haylli</hi> Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Ululaez</hi> Maya.
</quote>

<p>
Ghost, Spirit of Dead. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Goeiz.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Opoyem</hi>
Ey.&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Necuya</hi> Epirian, <hi rend='italic'>Goe</hi>
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Ghaib</hi> Aramic and Persian,
<hi rend='italic'>Goiti</hi> Slavic&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Goz</hi>
Vilela, <hi rend='italic'>Coyocop</hi> Nachez,
<hi rend='italic'>Aguis</hi> Peru.
</quote>

<p>
Grand-father. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ahiacavo</hi> R. See Father.
<hi rend='italic'>Narguti</hi> In Eyeri D.
</p>

<p>
Guayac, Holy-wood. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guayac</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Guayacan</hi>
H. <hi rend='italic'>Guacum</hi> O.
</p>

<p>
Grove, Forest. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Arcabutos</hi> Ac.
</p>

<p>
Good. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tiao</hi> R. <hi rend='italic'>Taino</hi> D. See noble.
</p>

<p>
House, Habitation. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Boa</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Bohio</hi> A. <hi rend='italic'>Bai</hi>
R. <hi rend='italic'>Canei</hi> M. <hi rend='italic'>Tunohoko</hi>
Eyeri D. Primitive.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Ocos</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Hustau</hi>
Romanic, <hi rend='italic'>Acam</hi> Afr Atlantic,
<hi rend='italic'>Uyon</hi> Uigur, <hi rend='italic'>Huis</hi>
Old French, <hi rend='italic'>Khaneh</hi> Persian, <hi rend='italic'>Kanaba</hi>
Thibet, <hi rend='italic'>Oneh</hi> Old Egypt,
<hi rend='italic'>Bantaba</hi> Fulah, <hi rend='italic'>Beit</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>baith</hi> Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Bara</hi>
Pelvi, <hi rend='italic'>Batos</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Beotes</hi> Pelagic,
<hi rend='italic'>Xoa</hi> Dorian, <hi rend='italic'>Hu</hi>
Chinese, <hi rend='italic'>Bohiga</hi> Celtic, <hi rend='italic'>Ca</hi> Etruscan,
<hi rend='italic'>Abode, Booth</hi> English&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bohio</hi>
Apalachi, <hi rend='italic'>Buhio</hi> Maya,
<hi rend='italic'>Ochoch</hi> Poconchi, <hi rend='italic'>Aothi,
Baua</hi> Galibi, <hi rend='italic'>Pokos</hi> Tao, <hi rend='italic'>Nixai</hi>
Quiché, <hi rend='italic'>Uya</hi> Lulé, <hi rend='italic'>Bahi</hi>
Aruac, <hi rend='italic'>Huachi</hi> Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Oca</hi>
Guarani, <hi rend='italic'>Uca</hi> Omagua, <hi rend='italic'>Ba</hi>
Mizteca, <hi rend='italic'>Chaho</hi> Tarasca.
</quote>

<p>
Head, Summit, beginning, upon, peak.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zimu</hi> D. <hi rend='italic'>Huibo</hi>.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Cima</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Suma</hi>
Italic, <hi rend='italic'>Ima Sama</hi> Pelagic and Sanscrit,
<hi rend='italic'>Imula</hi> Ombay Id, <hi rend='italic'>Kimita</hi>
Yedzo, <hi rend='italic'>Kima</hi> Ligurian,
<hi rend='italic'>Iman</hi> Arabic, <hi rend='italic'>Zimba</hi>
Bunda Congo, <hi rend='italic'>Yuma</hi> Japan&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Uma</hi>
Peruvian, <hi rend='italic'>Chémé</hi> Quiché,
<hi rend='italic'>China</hi> Poconchi, <hi rend='italic'>Umitz</hi>
Nutka, <hi rend='italic'>Muhuti</hi> Cora, <hi rend='italic'>Yama</hi> Othomi.
</quote>

<p>
Heliconia. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bihao</hi>.
</p>

<p>
High, lofty, eminent, excellent, strong,
raised. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tihu</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Tichetu, Car, Huibo,
Uta</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Ti</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Tien</hi>
Chinese, <hi rend='italic'>Tithos</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Auti, Alti</hi>
Italic, L. <hi rend='italic'>Tith</hi> Lybian,
<hi rend='italic'>Tip</hi> Saxon, <hi rend='italic'>Timal</hi> Oscan,
<hi rend='italic'>Tohu</hi> Copt, <hi rend='italic'>Gibor</hi>
Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Bop</hi> Jolof, <hi rend='italic'>Obo</hi>
Mogol, <hi rend='italic'>Ube</hi>
Singala.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Iba</hi> Apalachi,
<hi rend='italic'>Uebo, Uipo</hi> Galibi, <hi rend='italic'>Hayo</hi>
Cado.
</quote>

<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>

<p>
Heaven, sky. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Turei</hi> D.
<hi rend='italic'>Siela</hi> O, <hi rend='italic'>Coaiba</hi>
R. <hi rend='italic'>Coyaba</hi> (Paradise.) <hi rend='italic'>Soraya</hi> (West
sky.) <hi rend='italic'>Ubec</hi> Ey.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Uranus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Skia</hi>
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Turan</hi> Old Persian, <hi rend='italic'>Irem</hi> Persian,
<hi rend='italic'>Aru</hi> Osset, <hi rend='italic'>Ciel</hi>
French, <hi rend='italic'>Coelum</hi> Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Arai</hi> Tahiti,
<hi rend='italic'>Coelba</hi> Ausonian, <hi rend='italic'>Suraga</hi>
Bugis, <hi rend='italic'>Suroloyo</hi> Kawi,
<hi rend='italic'>Surya</hi> Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Sora</hi>
Japan, <hi rend='italic'>Uren</hi> Armoric, <hi rend='italic'>Arai</hi> Turan,
<hi rend='italic'>Serua</hi> Baik, <hi rend='italic'>Urain</hi>
Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Hyalla</hi> Fullah.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Capu</hi>
Yaoy and Tamanac, <hi rend='italic'>Coane</hi> Maya, <hi rend='italic'>Cabu</hi>
Otomacas, <hi rend='italic'>Turci</hi> Paria, <hi rend='italic'>Hetucoba</hi>
Apalachi, <hi rend='italic'>Yabe</hi> Guarani,
<hi rend='italic'>Purini</hi> Tarasca, <hi rend='italic'>Cabo</hi>
Galibi, <hi rend='italic'>Tacab</hi> Poconchi, <hi rend='italic'>Pacha</hi>
Aymara.
</quote>

<p>
Heart and Soul. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nanichi</hi>&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Nasha</hi> Chaldic, <hi rend='italic'>Anima</hi>
Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Han</hi> Chinese, <hi rend='italic'>Gan</hi>
Turk, <hi rend='italic'>Huchi</hi> Deri Persian,
<hi rend='italic'>Uhane</hi> Havay, <hi rend='italic'>Zinio</hi> Afgan,
<hi rend='italic'>Nima</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Amé</hi>
Egypt, <hi rend='italic'>Anichal</hi> Celtic,
<hi rend='italic'>Nehima</hi> Congo,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Kaueshin</hi>
Aleutian, <hi rend='italic'>Ichick</hi> Huazteca,
<hi rend='italic'>Agna</hi> Cumana, <hi rend='italic'>Cama</hi>
Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Nashawanith</hi> Powhatan,
<hi rend='italic'>Ninohuani</hi> Galibi, <hi rend='italic'>Nandi</hi>
Ottomaca, <hi rend='italic'>Juani</hi> Yarura,
<hi rend='italic'>Amitani</hi> Maipuri, &amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
Holy. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Auc</hi> D. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yac</hi>
G. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guaca</hi> R.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Cadish</hi> Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Aucus</hi>
Old Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Hagios</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Agi</hi>
Touga, <hi rend='italic'>Haga</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Ca</hi>
Turan, <hi rend='italic'>Hancus</hi> Ausonian,
<hi rend='italic'>Khuab</hi> Old Egypt,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Aca</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>huaca</hi> Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Wakon</hi> Dacota,
<hi rend='italic'>Huacan</hi> Cora, <hi rend='italic'>Hualic</hi> Huazteca.
</quote>

<p>
Heat, hot, fever, dry. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zechon</hi>.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Zeziones</hi>
M.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Ako</hi> Old Arabic, <hi rend='italic'>Sicus</hi>
Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Xerone</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Chaone</hi> Pelagian,
<hi rend='italic'>Chon</hi> Egypt, <hi rend='italic'>Chaud</hi>
(Cho) French, <hi rend='italic'>Cau</hi> Romanic,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Achi</hi>
Chili.
</quote>

<p>
Hog, Swine, Pecari. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zaino</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Scuna</hi> Ac.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Sis-ino</hi> Japan, <hi rend='italic'>Chinia</hi>
Ausonian, <hi rend='italic'>Suina</hi> Russian,
<hi rend='italic'>Zayos</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Zanno</hi>
Oscan, <hi rend='italic'>Zinial</hi> Ligurian, <hi rend='italic'>Muaca</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Charcu</hi> Celtic, <hi rend='italic'>Taguazen</hi>
Guanch,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Tayasu</hi> Guarani,
<hi rend='italic'>Sayones</hi> Calamari, <hi rend='italic'>Nigda</hi> Mbaya.
</quote>

<p>
His, her, He, she. LI.
</p>

<p>
Hill. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Huibo</hi> D. <hi rend='italic'>Carive</hi> Laet, see mountain.
</p>

<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>

<p>
Hollow, hole, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yara</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Yari</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Yaru</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Coatris</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Trou</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Creux</hi> French.
</p>

<p>
Hut. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Boharque</hi> M.
<hi rend='italic'>Canei</hi> G. <hi rend='italic'>Tuhonoko</hi>
Ey. See House.
</p>

<p>
Insect. See Little.
</p>

<p>
Island, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Caya</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Caic</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Caiz</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Caiques</hi>. All&mdash;see
Earth and Land.
</p>

<p>
Infinite, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Rapita</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Apito</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Virita</hi> R. D. O.
title of God with <hi rend='italic'>Guaca</hi> holy. Analogies
with <hi rend='italic'>Rapid</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Veritas</hi> Latin.
</p>

<p>
Invisible, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guimazoa</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Zuimaco</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Quinazona</hi>
R. D. O.&mdash;other title of God, compound
words, perhaps of different import:
with many affinities in divine names of
Lybia, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
In, Within, Inside. <hi rend='italic'>Hiqui</hi> in Cuba Laet.
<hi rend='italic'>Nacan</hi> C.
</p>

<p>
Indigo, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Digo</hi> R.
</p>

<p>
Is, it is, this is. ZI&mdash;primitive <hi rend='italic'>Ze</hi> in Mosaic
and Oriental Languages.&mdash;He is, she
is, EL or <hi rend='italic'>eil</hi>, see Grammar.
</p>

<p>
King. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cazic</hi> A. <hi rend='italic'>Cacique</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Caciqui</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Caxicus</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Casiche</hi> Various spellings.&mdash;See the
Annals.
</p>

<p>
Knowledge, to know. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guaroco</hi>,
D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Char</hi>
Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Imparar</hi> Italic, <hi rend='italic'>Rasaca</hi>
Malay.
</p>

<p>
Life. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bi</hi> G.&mdash;Primitive. I Oriental L.
<hi rend='italic'>Vita</hi> Italic, <hi rend='italic'>Bios</hi>
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Vie</hi> French.
</p>

<p>
Lizard. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guana</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Iguana</hi>
A. <hi rend='italic'>Yuanas</hi>
Her,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Aguana</hi> Guinea, <hi rend='italic'>Iagandu</hi> Congo,
<hi rend='italic'>Athaguan</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Manatha</hi>
Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Guha</hi>
Singala,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Iuganas</hi> Cumana, <hi rend='italic'>Leguan</hi>
Aruwak.
</p>

<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>

<p>
Labor. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Boria</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Laborer, Vassal, Servant. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nabor</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Anaboria</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Naboritis</hi>. See Annals.
</p>

<p>
Little, Small, Nothing, Insect. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nigua</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Nianti</hi> Ey.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Nigu</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>niga</hi> Sicily,
<hi rend='italic'>Niente</hi> Italic, <hi rend='italic'>Ngai</hi>
Birman, <hi rend='italic'>Naga</hi>
Hindi, <hi rend='italic'>Ngni</hi> Newar, <hi rend='italic'>Guti</hi>
Bask, <hi rend='italic'>Minizi</hi> Gothic,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Piqua</hi>
Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Chigua</hi> Darien,
<hi rend='italic'>Nechet</hi> Adaiz, <hi rend='italic'>Enchique</hi>
Yaoy.
</quote>

<p>
Land. See Earth.
</p>

<p>
Lord. See Noble.
</p>

<p>
Light, Shining. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tureigna</hi> D. See Heaven.
</p>

<p>
Lake, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Haguai</hi>. See Water.
</p>

<p>
Man, men, male, husband, people. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hito
Guani</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cari</hi> R. <hi rend='italic'>Magua</hi> G. 3 roots IT,
RI, AN, connected all over the world: IT
found in
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Iota</hi> Old Gothic, <hi rend='italic'>Itua</hi>
Polynesia, <hi rend='italic'>Toy</hi> Old Egypt,
<hi rend='italic'>Hitnos</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Hita</hi>
Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Ati</hi> Zend, <hi rend='italic'>Itga</hi> Nubian,
<hi rend='italic'>Hetus</hi> Ausonian, <hi rend='italic'>Het</hi>
Talahet, <hi rend='italic'>Dito</hi> Kawi, <hi rend='italic'>Fito</hi>
Japan, <hi rend='italic'>Tuhihuit</hi> Cumanche, &amp;c.&mdash;
</p>

<p>
RI in <hi rend='italic'>Ria</hi> Congo, <hi rend='italic'>Vir</hi>
Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Hari</hi> Tombuctu, <hi rend='italic'>Ira</hi>
Tambu, <hi rend='italic'>Er</hi> Turk, <hi rend='italic'>Air</hi>
Celtic and Haikan, <hi rend='italic'>Yeri</hi> Hungarian,
<hi rend='italic'>Ari</hi> Peruvian, <hi rend='italic'>Nieri</hi>
Illyrian, <hi rend='italic'>Vair</hi> Gothic,
<hi rend='italic'>Viro</hi> Timuacan, <hi rend='italic'>Ir</hi> Oscan, &amp;c.&mdash;
</p>

<p>
AN in <hi rend='italic'>Nan</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Yang</hi>,
Chinese D. <hi rend='italic'>Ani</hi> Anam, <hi rend='italic'>Gens</hi>
Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Han</hi> Mbaya, <hi rend='italic'>Huinac</hi>
Tzendal, <hi rend='italic'>Aner</hi> Greek,
<hi rend='italic'>Orang</hi> Malay, <hi rend='italic'>Guan</hi>
Gaunch,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hua</hi> Apalachi, <hi rend='italic'>Huentu</hi>
Chili, <hi rend='italic'>Guana</hi> Guanas, &amp;c.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Mother. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mama</hi> D.&mdash;Primitive word,
found in 500 Languages; identic or nearly
so in all the Sanscrit and European Languages,
the Atlantic Dialects, Bask and
Manchu, Egypt and Tartary, Thibet and
Polynesia; changed to <hi rend='italic'>Mu</hi> in Chinese;
<hi rend='italic'>Am</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Om</hi> in Arabic Languages&mdash;In America
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
quite common also, least changed in
<hi rend='italic'>Hama</hi> Shebaoy, <hi rend='italic'>Amani</hi>,
Adaiz <hi rend='italic'>Ma</hi> Mobima,
<hi rend='italic'>Mama</hi> Betoy, Omagua and Peru.
</p>

<p>
Moon. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Maroyo</hi> R.
<hi rend='italic'>Marohus</hi> O. <hi rend='italic'>Mona</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Kati</hi> in Eyeri. See the Annals.
</p>

<p>
Much, Many. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tocheta</hi>
D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Tucho</hi> Iberian,
<hi rend='italic'>Chuanti</hi> Ausonian, <hi rend='italic'>Chehel</hi> Persian,
<hi rend='italic'>Totus</hi> Latin.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Tacha</hi>
Achagua, <hi rend='italic'>Mioch</hi>
Mexican, <hi rend='italic'>Tobu</hi> Brazilian.
</p>

<p>
Mammeafruit. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mamey</hi> D.
</p>

<p>
Millet. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Panycke</hi> D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Panicum</hi> Latin.
</p>

<p>
Mountain or hill, highlands, rough country.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tihui</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Huibo</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Baino</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Zibao</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Hayti</hi>.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Mtay</hi> Carthul, <hi rend='italic'>Oiten</hi>
Lusitanian, <hi rend='italic'>Hauteur</hi> (pr hotoer)
French, <hi rend='italic'>Tith</hi> Pelagic,
<hi rend='italic'>Buno</hi>, Romaic, <hi rend='italic'>Guibo</hi> Aramic,
<hi rend='italic'>Tohu</hi> Copt,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Uibui</hi>
Galibi, <hi rend='italic'>Caquihuin</hi> Totonaca,
<hi rend='italic'>Titi</hi> Collas of Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Ehuata</hi>
Omagua, <hi rend='italic'>Vata</hi> Tarasca,
<hi rend='italic'>Hatez</hi> Chontal, <hi rend='italic'>Guetia</hi> Mbaya, &amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
Music, Noise. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Habao</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Giahuba</hi>.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Hapan</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Hubub</hi>
Celtic, <hi rend='italic'>Buba</hi> Congo, <hi rend='italic'>Bhatai</hi>
Bali, <hi rend='italic'>Behan</hi> Turan and
Khorazan.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Paypa</hi> Peru,
<hi rend='italic'>Ahbal</hi> Huazteca, <hi rend='italic'>Tupan</hi> Guarani.
</quote>

<p>
Me, I, my, mine, myself&mdash;NI, N', MI,
M'.&mdash;Primitive, found in all the European
and Asiatic Languages more or less deviated&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Ni</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mich</hi> Bask,
<hi rend='italic'>Ani</hi> Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Mina</hi> Negro Langs,
<hi rend='italic'>Nio</hi> Japan,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ne</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Me</hi> Mexican Languages, <hi rend='italic'>Na</hi> Apalachi,
<hi rend='italic'>Ni</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mi</hi> Linapi Dial,
<hi rend='italic'>Hi</hi> Tarasca, <hi rend='italic'>Ani</hi> Pimas
Muscolgi, <hi rend='italic'>Nia</hi> Cora, <hi rend='italic'>Mio</hi>
Dacota, <hi rend='italic'>Gane</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kuno</hi> Japan.
</quote>

<p>
Metal, hard. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nin</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Guanin</hi>
C. <hi rend='italic'>Hobin</hi>
D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Irania</hi> Sanscrit,
<hi rend='italic'>Vina</hi> Jolof,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Panilgue</hi>
(Iron) Chili.
</p>

<p>
Manati, Sea-Cow. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Manati</hi> A.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Lamantin</hi>
French, <hi rend='italic'>Mamatino</hi> Sicilian.
</p>

<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>

<p>
Mosquito. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Jejen</hi> D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Zinzara</hi> Toscan.
</p>

<p>
Mushroom. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yegan</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Guayegan</hi>
R.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Fungus</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Agaricus</hi> Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Mycos</hi>
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Guarib</hi>
Slavic, <hi rend='italic'>Guaygrion</hi> Celtic, and Old
French.
</p>

<p>
Meadow. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zavana</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Zabana</hi> A. See
Field.
</p>

<p>
Master, Lord. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guama</hi>. See Prince.
</p>

<p>
Mantle. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yaguas</hi>. Her. See Dress.
</p>

<p>
Moving. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mana</hi>. See Grammar.
</p>

<p>
Manioc. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Boniata</hi> O, is the mild kind,
<hi rend='italic'>Yuco</hi> D.
</p>

<p>
Mahogany. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mahogani</hi> H. <hi rend='italic'>Cahoba</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Mangrove tree. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mangle</hi> H.
</p>

<p>
Noble, good, fine, handsome, lord, chief.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Taino</hi> A. <hi rend='italic'>Mato</hi>
Her, <hi rend='italic'>Nitaino</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mitaino</hi>
Dialects.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Thano</hi> Oscan, <hi rend='italic'>Tona</hi> Japan,
<hi rend='italic'>Hainac</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Theano</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Tuyano</hi>
Pelagian, <hi rend='italic'>Turanos</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Zain</hi>
Turk, <hi rend='italic'>Atueyn</hi> Birman,
<hi rend='italic'>No</hi> (fine) Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Ethauo</hi>
Singala, <hi rend='italic'>Tayon</hi> Kamchatka,
<hi rend='italic'>Talen</hi> Iberian, <hi rend='italic'>Ona</hi>
(good) Bask, <hi rend='italic'>Sitino</hi> Old Arabic;
<hi rend='italic'>Tonos</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Taminas</hi>
Scythian, <hi rend='italic'>Maitai</hi> Polynesia,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Toani</hi>
Mexican, <hi rend='italic'>Tzalleine</hi> Huazteca, <hi rend='italic'>Votan</hi> Chontal,
<hi rend='italic'>Noen</hi> Mocobi, <hi rend='italic'>Nin</hi>
Abipon, <hi rend='italic'>Hitana</hi> Apalachi.
</quote>

<p>
No, Not, Nothing, Bad. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mayana</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Maca</hi>
D.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Eyni</hi> Mozabi, Lybian; <hi rend='italic'>Nani</hi>
Romanic, <hi rend='italic'>May</hi> Dorian,
<hi rend='italic'>Niani</hi> Ausonian, <hi rend='italic'>Niente</hi>
Italian, <hi rend='italic'>Ima</hi> Tahiti, <hi rend='italic'>Mabi</hi>
Birman, <hi rend='italic'>An</hi> Copt,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ama</hi>
Othomi, <hi rend='italic'>Isana</hi> Cado, <hi rend='italic'>Nitio</hi>
Guarani, <hi rend='italic'>Mayan</hi> Puncays; <hi rend='italic'>Ma</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Matar</hi> Maya,
<hi rend='italic'>Mana</hi> Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Mani</hi> Poconchi.
</quote>

<p>
Nuts. <hi rend='italic'>Zibayos</hi> D&mdash;Derived from <hi rend='italic'>Ziba</hi>
Stone.
</p>

<p>
Now, To-day. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Di</hi>. See Grammar.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Adesso
Oggidi</hi> Italian.
</p>

<p>
One, first, alone, unique. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ata</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Atu</hi> R.
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
D.&mdash;Primitive, found in 200 Languages.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Bat</hi> Bask, <hi rend='italic'>Yat</hi>
Kong Chinese, <hi rend='italic'>Atus</hi> Oscan, <hi rend='italic'>Ada</hi> Aramic,
<hi rend='italic'>Ath</hi> Egypt, <hi rend='italic'>Ata</hi>
Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Tahi</hi> Polynesia, <hi rend='italic'>Tah</hi>
Gaman Afr, <hi rend='italic'>Auto</hi> Greek,
<hi rend='italic'>Yat</hi> Shilo Atlantic, <hi rend='italic'>Suat</hi>
Sumatra.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ata</hi> Muyzcas,
<hi rend='italic'>Hatun</hi> Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Mato</hi> Pimas,
<hi rend='italic'>Ata</hi> Innuit, <hi rend='italic'>Aguit</hi>
Vilela, <hi rend='italic'>Carata</hi> Sapibo, <hi rend='italic'>Nacut</hi>
Micmac, <hi rend='italic'>Scatta</hi> Onondago.
</quote>

<p>
Old, oldman. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ua</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Boh</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Beh</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bohito</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Bohique</hi> A. See Priest.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Holbo</hi>
Copt,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bial</hi>
Huazteca, &amp;c.&mdash;Very old Uaua
as in Mexican.
</p>

<p>
Oldest, Eldest. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Nenechin</hi>, R.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ainé</hi>
French.
</p>

<p>
Onion, Bulb. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cabaicos</hi> R. <hi rend='italic'>Macoanes</hi>
D.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Cepa</hi> Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Ceba</hi> Tonga
Isl., <hi rend='italic'>Kipo</hi> Nepal, <hi rend='italic'>Cipola</hi> Italian,
<hi rend='italic'>Cipuda</hi> Sicilian, <hi rend='italic'>Zaibel</hi>
German, <hi rend='italic'>Bacang</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bawang</hi>
Malay and Javan.
</quote>

<p>
Omnipotent. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Liella</hi> R. <hi rend='italic'>Siela</hi>. Title of
God, analogies with EL, and <hi rend='italic'>Ciel</hi> Heaven
in French, pr. <hi rend='italic'>Siel</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Opossum. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tona</hi> R.
</p>

<p>
Ocymum. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Zochen</hi> R.
</p>

<p>
Paddle, Oar. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Pagaya</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Pages</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Nae</hi> D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Pahi</hi>
(boat) Tahiti, <hi rend='italic'>Nae</hi> is the root of
boat in all Oriental and Pelagic Languages.
</p>

<p>
Pheasant. <hi rend='italic'>Babiayas</hi> Her.
Cuba.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Phasianus</hi>
Latin.
</p>

<p>
Palace. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Canei</hi> H. See House.
</p>

<p>
Peace, repose, rest, quiet. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Toca</hi>
D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Sata</hi>
Lybian, <hi rend='italic'>Netuc</hi> Tozi old Arabic, <hi rend='italic'>Cueto</hi>
Sicilian, <hi rend='italic'>Paca</hi> Aussonian, <hi rend='italic'>Thegi</hi> Scand.
</p>

<p>
Pepper, pungent, sharp, strong taste.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Axi</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Aji</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Ages</hi> A.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ac</hi> is a primitive
word for sharp. <hi rend='italic'>Ac</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>ag</hi>
Celtic, <hi rend='italic'>Acutus</hi> Latin,
<hi rend='italic'>Oxus</hi> Greek,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Axi</hi> Cumana.
</p>

<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>

<p>
Priest. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bohito</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Bautio</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Buhui</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bohique</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Behique</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Boition</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Bouiti</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Buutio</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Boyeto</hi>, &amp;c., by different writers, and in
Dialects. See the Annals and Notes.
</p>

<p>
Pontif, High-priest. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Buhui-tihu</hi> A. See
High.
</p>

<p>
Part or Share. See Apart.
</p>

<p>
Pipe, Tube. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tobaco</hi> D. <hi rend='italic'>Tubus</hi> Latin,
<hi rend='italic'>Sipos</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Hukah</hi>
Hindi, <hi rend='italic'>Chibuc</hi> Turk,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bacana</hi>
Carib.
</p>

<p>
Purple. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ragui</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Anigua</hi>
D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Uarg</hi> Celtic,
<hi rend='italic'>Banicos</hi>, Iberian.
</p>

<p>
Patatos. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Batatas</hi>.&mdash;The same in South
America.
</p>

<p>
Place. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guara</hi> R.
</p>

<p>
People, men. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Chivi</hi>,
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ibar</hi> D. <hi rend='italic'>Cabres</hi>
Eyeri. See Man.
</p>

<p>
Parrot. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Paraca</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Maca</hi> Cuba and Aruac.
</p>

<p>
Psidium pyriferum. Guava pear. <hi rend='italic'>Guayava</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Guaxaba</hi> D.
</p>

<p>
Pimento. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Pimento</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Pimienta</hi> Maya.
</p>

<p>
Poke. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cucato</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Xucato</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Pocan</hi> Powhatan,
<hi rend='italic'>Coacum</hi> Mohigan, <hi rend='italic'>Cuechiliz</hi> Mexican.
</p>

<p>
Plain. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Magua</hi>. See Field.
</p>

<p>
Palm. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yagua</hi> O. <hi rend='italic'>Caico</hi> Eyeri.
</p>

<p>
Paradise. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Coaibai</hi> R. Her. See Heaven.
</p>

<p>
Physician. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Boiti</hi> G. See Priest.
</p>

<p>
Parsnep. <hi rend='italic'>Guaieros</hi> D.
</p>

<p>
Plumbtree, Myrobolan. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Xobos</hi> R. Plumbs
<hi rend='italic'>Hicaco</hi> H. <hi rend='italic'>Cainito</hi> D.
</p>

<p>
Prince, Lord. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guama</hi> D.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Tequeni-gua</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Gua-miniqui</hi>
Her, <hi rend='italic'>Hamon</hi> afr Atlantes,
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
<hi rend='italic'>Samah</hi> Lybian, <hi rend='italic'>Lucumon</hi>
Etruscan, <hi rend='italic'>Vimala</hi> Sanscrit,
<hi rend='italic'>Magister</hi> Lat., <hi rend='italic'>Mana</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Menuh</hi>, Zend and Old Sanser,
<hi rend='italic'>Haman</hi> Iran, <hi rend='italic'>Buyama</hi>
Old Arabic&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Tequanes</hi> Mexican.,
<hi rend='italic'>Tuinametin</hi> Tarasca, <hi rend='italic'>Tequenes</hi>
Muyzcas, <hi rend='italic'>Inquathil</hi>
Huazteca, <hi rend='italic'>Amo</hi> Choco, <hi rend='italic'>Ahan</hi> Maya, &amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
Raft. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Balza</hi> A.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Balza</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Balca</hi> Italian
D. <hi rend='italic'>Balagan</hi> Malay.
</p>

<p>
Root, Yam. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Niames</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Ames</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>M'ames</hi>.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Ima</hi> Molucas, <hi rend='italic'>Lami</hi>
Macasar, <hi rend='italic'>Nuni</hi> Copt, <hi rend='italic'>Boniam</hi>
Celtic, <hi rend='italic'>Boan</hi> Persian, <hi rend='italic'>Niami</hi>
African L.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Nanat</hi>
Cora, <hi rend='italic'>Moniatos</hi> Calamari.
</quote>

<p>
Rabbits. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Aguti</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Aguchi</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Huti</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Utia</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Cuti</hi> A. R. Peculiar Genus <hi rend='italic'>Cavia</hi> like
Rabbits, 4 kinds in Hayti, says Laet.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hutia</hi>
Largest; <hi rend='italic'>Chemi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cori</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Mohuy</hi>,
Smallest.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cavia</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Pucarara</hi> in Dialects
E. <hi rend='italic'>Quinaxes</hi> E. Cuba.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Saraguchi</hi> Egypt,
<hi rend='italic'>Guniyu</hi> Sicilian, <hi rend='italic'>Cuniculus</hi> Latin,
<hi rend='italic'>Lagotis</hi> Greek,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cuyes</hi>
Quito, <hi rend='italic'>Coy</hi> Huazteca, <hi rend='italic'>Cuya</hi>
Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Curus</hi> Tayronas, <hi rend='italic'>Quinazis</hi> Cauca.
</quote>

<p>
Red. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ris</hi>. Diaz, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Achioto</hi> Her. Bay or
Scarlet-red. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Pu</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bu</hi>.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Giria</hi> Bask, <hi rend='italic'>Kiris</hi>
Arab, <hi rend='italic'>Rehita</hi> Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Rosso</hi> Italian,
<hi rend='italic'>Rubus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Badius</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Puniceus</hi> Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Phoenis</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Erythros</hi>
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Bai</hi> Egypt, <hi rend='italic'>Bugra</hi>
Maroco, <hi rend='italic'>Arbho</hi> Thibet.
</quote>

<p>
Rich, Wealth, Wealthy, Treasure. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Duchi</hi>
M. <hi rend='italic'>Duhos</hi> G. <hi rend='italic'>Duyhzi</hi> D.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Divitia</hi> Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Guhya</hi>
Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Duhut</hi> Hindi,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Dites</hi>
Darien, <hi rend='italic'>Cusca</hi> Quichè.
</quote>

<p>
Rattle, Holy music. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Maraca</hi>.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Amara</hi> Bali, <hi rend='italic'>Raya</hi>
Pelagic.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Quaqua</hi> Huazteca,
<hi rend='italic'>Amaraca</hi> Tupi Brazil, <hi rend='italic'>Tamaraca</hi>
Aruac and Anzerma,
<hi rend='italic'>Malaca</hi> Apalachi.
</quote>

<p>
Retreat. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tiba</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Thbe</hi>
Moses, <hi rend='italic'>Tiba</hi> Thibet,
<hi rend='italic'>Theba</hi> Egypt. &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Remora fish. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Remora</hi> G. <hi rend='italic'>Reveo</hi> H.
<hi rend='italic'>Rambos</hi> Ac.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Remor</hi> Pelagic.
</p>

<p>
Rope. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cabuya</hi> G.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cable</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Cord</hi>, English,
French, Italian.
</p>

<p>
River. See Stream.
</p>

<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>

<p>
Rites, worship, reality.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Reiti</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ritus</hi>
Latin &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Sea, Ocean. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bagua</hi> V. <hi rend='italic'>Balahua</hi> Ey.
Evident analogy with <hi rend='italic'>Agua</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Aqua</hi>, (water)
in Spanish and Italian.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Talahua</hi> Mogol, <hi rend='italic'>Balua</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Pela</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Va</hi> Sanscrit,
<hi rend='italic'>Ab</hi> Persian, <hi rend='italic'>Baa</hi>
Sussu of Afr, <hi rend='italic'>Panyui</hi> Tarahum, <hi rend='italic'>Cagua</hi>
Saliva, <hi rend='italic'>Gua</hi> Tupi.
</quote>

<p>
Star, Bright. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Starei</hi> D.&mdash;Primitive,
found from England to India.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Asterias</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Aster</hi>
Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Sial</hi> Osset, <hi rend='italic'>Taroth</hi>
Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Tara</hi> Hindi, <hi rend='italic'>Stara</hi>
Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Izeran</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Yethra</hi>
African Atlantic, <hi rend='italic'>Izara</hi> Bask,
<hi rend='italic'>Sitarah</hi> Persian.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Sirica</hi>
Galibi, Tamanac and Otomaca, <hi rend='italic'>Chirica</hi> Yaoy,
<hi rend='italic'>Silico</hi> Betoy, <hi rend='italic'>Ergrai</hi>
Abipon, <hi rend='italic'>Stan</hi> Aleutian, <hi rend='italic'>Setere</hi>
Patagon.
</quote>

<p>
Sword, Club, Weapon. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Macana</hi> A. <hi rend='italic'>Machana</hi>
O.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Mukenai</hi> Dorian, <hi rend='italic'>Makaira</hi>
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Magal</hi> Aramic,
<hi rend='italic'>Maguila</hi> Bask, <hi rend='italic'>Maco</hi>
(spear) Gaunch, <hi rend='italic'>Mayado</hi> (club)
Do. <hi rend='italic'>Mazza</hi> Italian,
<hi rend='italic'>Mace</hi> Old English,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Macana</hi>
Darien, and many other languages of South America.
<hi rend='italic'>Macahui</hi> Mexican.
</quote>

<p>
Stream, River, Flood, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Niquen</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Neguin</hi>
D. <hi rend='italic'>Ziniquin</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cuhen</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Agua</hi> in Cuba.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Dhuni</hi> Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Dunic</hi>
Osset, <hi rend='italic'>Dexamen</hi> Guanch,
<hi rend='italic'>Chuen</hi> Chinese, <hi rend='italic'>Cuemen</hi>
Celtic, <hi rend='italic'>Hunica Kayan</hi> Turan,
<hi rend='italic'>Nahuen</hi> Pehlvi, <hi rend='italic'>Amnica</hi>
Ausonian, <hi rend='italic'>Nukil</hi> Afgan,
<hi rend='italic'>Binanga</hi> Bugi, <hi rend='italic'>Annigan</hi>
Scand, <hi rend='italic'>Annegar</hi> (to drown)
Italian, <hi rend='italic'>Nikli</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Khian</hi>
Lezghi, <hi rend='italic'>Nikar</hi>, Toba Old Arabic.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Wuinic</hi>
Aruac, <hi rend='italic'>Necua</hi> Yarura, <hi rend='italic'>Cuyk</hi> Aleutian,
<hi rend='italic'>Nidachi</hi> Cado, <hi rend='italic'>Uchi</hi> Chacta.
</quote>

<p>
Storm, Hurricane, Fury. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Furacane</hi> D.
<hi rend='italic'>Huracanes</hi> G. <hi rend='italic'>Urogan</hi> Ey. Derived from
rage and fury of elements, primitive roots.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Rages Soarah</hi>, (rage and storm) Aramic,
<hi rend='italic'>Racas</hi>
Toba Arabic, <hi rend='italic'>Taravat</hi> African Negros,
<hi rend='italic'>Burasca</hi> Italian,
<hi rend='italic'>Orage</hi> French, <hi rend='italic'>Hurlig</hi> Saxon, &amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
Sun. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Boinial</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Binthaitel</hi>. See Annals.
<hi rend='italic'>Kachi</hi> in Eyeri. See King.
</p>

<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>

<p>
Setting Sun, the West. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Soraya</hi>. See
Heaven.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Surya</hi> Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Soir</hi>
evening in French, <hi rend='italic'>Sera</hi> in Italian,
<hi rend='italic'>Vesper</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hesper</hi>,
Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Spera</hi> Romaic.
</quote>

<p>
Song, see Dance.&mdash;Soul, see Heart.&mdash;Small,
see Little.
</p>

<p>
Son, EL. Sons, ILI. See Annals. <hi rend='italic'>Rabu</hi>,
in Eyeri. See Grammar.
</p>

<p>
Stone, Rock. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ziba</hi> A. See the Annals.
Rocky <hi rend='italic'>Zibao</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Such. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Gua</hi>. Demonstrative article much
employed, found in many old languages.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ath</hi>
Aramic, Arabic, Hebrew, Egyptian,
&amp;c.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Gua</hi> in South America.
</p>

<p>
Shell. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guey</hi> C. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cohob</hi> O.
</p>

<p>
Strong. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Carib</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Agi</hi> A. See Pepper.
</p>

<p>
Shark. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tiburon</hi> Ac. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tebura</hi> O.
</p>

<p>
Stranger. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Chapeton</hi> AC. <hi rend='italic'>Guachinango</hi>
Diaz in Cuba.
</p>

<p>
Soup, Boiled. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Calalu</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bollito</hi>
It. <hi rend='italic'>Olla</hi>
Spt.
</p>

<p>
Snake. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Boba</hi> in Boriquen.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Boa</hi>
African
L., <hi rend='italic'>Ob</hi> Oriental L., <hi rend='italic'>Coluber</hi> Latin,
<hi rend='italic'>Ophis</hi> Greek.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Coa</hi>
Mexican, <hi rend='italic'>Boya</hi> Guarani.
</p>

<p>
The, English indicative article I, HI, HIN,
ZI, NI, LI.&mdash;Primitive, variable in Dialects,
root I, same as I Italian, IL, L' do.
Y, <hi rend='italic'>Ye</hi> Old English, I Persian and Lybian,
<hi rend='italic'>Yn</hi> Celtic, Y Old Arabic,
<hi rend='italic'>Ni</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>N'</hi> Illyrian,
<hi rend='italic'>Ohi</hi> Havay,&mdash;TI Cora, TL Mexican,
<hi rend='italic'>Ini</hi> Pimal, <hi rend='italic'>Ni</hi>
Lapani D., <hi rend='italic'>Nuya</hi> Achagua,
<hi rend='italic'>Iu</hi> Payuri. See Grammar.
</p>

<p>
This, that, these, those. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Gua</hi>, same as
such. See Grammar.
</p>

<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>

<p>
Thou, thy, thine. TI, TE.&mdash;Primitive
from Celtic to Sanscrit. <hi rend='italic'>Ti</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>te</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>toi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>tien</hi>
Greek and Illiryan, nearly similar in Bask,
Gothic, Pelagic, Latin, Italian, Persian,
Magyar, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Take. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Chuc</hi> C. <hi rend='italic'>Chugue</hi>
Her.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Busca</hi>
Italian, <hi rend='italic'>Aku</hi> Lampung of Sumatra.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Huyca</hi>
Huazteca, <hi rend='italic'>Uhca</hi> Tarasca.
</p>

<p>
Tomato. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Tomates</hi> G.
</p>

<p>
Temple. See Church.
</p>

<p>
Tree. See Wood.
</p>

<p>
Town, habitation. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bohio</hi>, same as house&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Bahus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Pagus</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Urbis</hi> Italic L., <hi rend='italic'>Paese</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Pays</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Payz</hi>
Modern I., <hi rend='italic'>Choyo</hi> Greek D., <hi rend='italic'>Bajeth</hi>
Aramic, <hi rend='italic'>Huebo</hi>
Iberian, <hi rend='italic'>Bohus</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Bya</hi> Scand, &amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
Thread. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hico</hi> D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hilo</hi>
Oscan, <hi rend='italic'>Trico</hi>
Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Hagu</hi> Nepal&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Hito</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Pito</hi> Maya.
</p>

<p>
Tobacco, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cohiba</hi> O. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cogioba</hi>
R. <hi rend='italic'>Cohoba</hi>
D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Dokhan</hi> Arabic, <hi rend='italic'>Tuhica</hi>
Nuba.
</p>

<p>
Turtle. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Icota</hi> G. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Icotea</hi>
H. <hi rend='italic'>Cabini</hi> D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Chucua</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Icuma</hi> Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Boco</hi>
Bali.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cotos</hi>
Cumana.
</p>

<p>
Two, or Second. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bem</hi>?&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bi</hi>
Bask, <hi rend='italic'>Binus</hi>
Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Ambi</hi> Italian.
</p>

<p>
Three, or Third. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Abem</hi>?
</p>

<p>
Tame, Mild. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Matum</hi> D.
<hi rend='italic'>Boniatum</hi> O.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bonus</hi>
Latin.
</p>

<p>
Throne. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Duchi</hi> M.
</p>

<p>
Vine, Creeper. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bejuco</hi> D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bixuco</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Bexucum</hi> O., <hi rend='italic'>Bochuco</hi> M. Grape-vine.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Uveriu</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Uyeros</hi>
M.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Uva</hi> Italian, <hi rend='italic'>Viniera</hi>
Catalan, <hi rend='italic'>Zibi</hi> Arabic, <hi rend='italic'>Ivy</hi> (pr Aivi) English.
</p>

<p>
Vassal. See Laborer.
</p>

<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>

<p>
Water. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ama</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bagua</hi>.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Primitive. <hi rend='italic'>Ma</hi> Atlantes and
Lybian, <hi rend='italic'>Aman</hi> Modern
Atlantes, <hi rend='italic'>Aemon</hi> Gaunch,
<hi rend='italic'>Mohu</hi> Copt, <hi rend='italic'>Nam</hi> Siam,
<hi rend='italic'>Maim</hi> Arabic,
<hi rend='italic'>Balua</hi> Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Oman</hi> Old Arabic,
<hi rend='italic'>Ameh</hi> Affadeh Negros,
<hi rend='italic'>Maza</hi> Congo, <hi rend='italic'>Kama</hi> Corana,
<hi rend='italic'>Asma</hi> Romaic,
<hi rend='italic'>Agua</hi> Spanish, <hi rend='italic'>Aigo</hi>
Romanic, <hi rend='italic'>Lagus</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Lacus</hi> (lake) Latin and
Celtic.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>May</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mayu</hi>, Peru,
<hi rend='italic'>Nhama</hi> Puris, <hi rend='italic'>Amuk</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ahua</hi> Tzuluki, <hi rend='italic'>Iia</hi>
Chontal, <hi rend='italic'>Maya</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>A</hi> Mexican, <hi rend='italic'>Agua</hi>
Veragua, <hi rend='italic'>Ak</hi> Atakapus, <hi rend='italic'>Haya</hi>
Shebay, <hi rend='italic'>Aya</hi> Yarura, <hi rend='italic'>Ahay</hi> Eslen, &amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
Woman, Wife. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Inuya</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hita</hi>.
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Iti</hi>. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Bibi</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Inara</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Liani</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Churon</hi>, Ey.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
Several roots, <hi rend='italic'>Iti</hi> same as
<hi rend='italic'>Hito</hi> man,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Bibi</hi> is wife D.
<hi rend='italic'>Gyna</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Guine</hi>
Old French, <hi rend='italic'>Nurin</hi> Desatir and
Hindi, <hi rend='italic'>Cunica</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Enaztia</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Toya</hi> Bask D., <hi rend='italic'>Iona</hi> Pelagic,
<hi rend='italic'>Zaita</hi> (girl) Bask,
<hi rend='italic'>Zitta</hi> (bride) Sicilian, <hi rend='italic'>Tanaya</hi>
Tedla Atlantic, <hi rend='italic'>Yuri</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nin</hi>
Chinese Dialects, <hi rend='italic'>Ita</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Itua</hi>,
Oscan, <hi rend='italic'>Gin</hi> Haikan, <hi rend='italic'>Gina</hi>
Australia, <hi rend='italic'>Cuinta</hi> Congo,
<hi rend='italic'>Nuriu</hi> Hindi, <hi rend='italic'>Machini</hi>
Polynesia; <hi rend='italic'>Ana</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Biana</hi> Oscan,
<hi rend='italic'>Puta</hi> Venitian, <hi rend='italic'>Heana Beana</hi>
Celtic, <hi rend='italic'>Zitella</hi> (girl)
Italian, <hi rend='italic'>Nurani</hi> Pehlvi,
<hi rend='italic'>Shina</hi> Copt, <hi rend='italic'>Wanito</hi> Kawi,
<hi rend='italic'>Uxor</hi> (wife) Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Boba</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Chura</hi> Slavic Bulgar, <hi rend='italic'>Biby</hi>
Malabar, <hi rend='italic'>Muchn</hi> Iran, <hi rend='italic'>Keron</hi>
(girl) Dorian Greek,
<hi rend='italic'>Koriza</hi> Romanic, &amp;c.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Uita</hi>
Cora, <hi rend='italic'>Zitua</hi> Mexican,
<hi rend='italic'>Nuatitu</hi> Saliva, <hi rend='italic'>Esena</hi>
Moxas, <hi rend='italic'>Tiguy</hi> Muyzcas, <hi rend='italic'>Tinio</hi>
Maypuri, <hi rend='italic'>Yatè</hi> Mocobi, <hi rend='italic'>Nikib</hi>
Atakapus, <hi rend='italic'>Zina</hi> (girl)
Othomi, <hi rend='italic'>Wanita</hi> Uchi, <hi rend='italic'>Iras</hi>
Cumana, <hi rend='italic'>Ira</hi> Coyba, <hi rend='italic'>Nia</hi>
Apalachi.
</quote>

<p>
White. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yuca</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Luca</hi> A.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Leucas</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Ca</hi>
Turan, <hi rend='italic'>Casis</hi> Scythian, <hi rend='italic'>Chuna</hi> Bask,
<hi rend='italic'>Aluca</hi> Lezghi, <hi rend='italic'>Cucua</hi>
Abask,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Luza</hi> Chacta, <hi rend='italic'>Elu</hi>
Galibi, <hi rend='italic'>Lapaca</hi> Mbaya, <hi rend='italic'>Zaco</hi>
Totonaca, <hi rend='italic'>Luc</hi> Chili, <hi rend='italic'>Yurac</hi>
Peru, <hi rend='italic'>Hacaya</hi> Cado, <hi rend='italic'>Usca</hi>
Ozage, <hi rend='italic'>Yutaga</hi> Mocobi,
<hi rend='italic'>Zac</hi> Maya.
</quote>

<p>
Wood or Tree. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Maca</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Mapu</hi>
A. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Butos</hi>
Ac.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Maica Chimala</hi> Dialects.&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Kha</hi> Circaz, <hi rend='italic'>Micha</hi>
Abask, <hi rend='italic'>Khad</hi> Osset, <hi rend='italic'>Taimala</hi>
Lezghi, <hi rend='italic'>Makia</hi> Oscan, (yet forest in
Toscan.) <hi rend='italic'>Gas</hi>
Hindi, <hi rend='italic'>Gatz</hi> Pehlvi, <hi rend='italic'>Agaz</hi>
Tartar, <hi rend='italic'>Cayu</hi> Malay,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Ca</hi>
Omagua and Guarani, <hi rend='italic'>Caa</hi> Mbaya, <hi rend='italic'>Kag</hi> Atakapas,
<hi rend='italic'>Canch</hi> Nachez, <hi rend='italic'>Manga</hi>
Adaiz, <hi rend='italic'>Aca</hi> Peru,
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
&amp;c. <hi rend='italic'>Butos</hi> is like <hi rend='italic'>Bois</hi>
(bua) French, <hi rend='italic'>Wood</hi> (Vud)
English.
</quote>

<p>
War, Army. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Guazavara</hi> G. <hi rend='italic'>Huctu</hi> Ey.
Warrior. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Vara</hi>.&mdash;Root same as in English
and Gothic, <hi rend='italic'>Guerra</hi> Italian, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Wanderer. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Umakua</hi> Ey.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Omuvagu</hi> Sicilian.
</p>

<p>
Wind or Air. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Banzex</hi> D.&mdash;Primitive.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<hi rend='italic'>Baud</hi> Old Arabic, <hi rend='italic'>Bao</hi>
Hindu, <hi rend='italic'>Bad</hi> Persian, <hi rend='italic'>Bau</hi> Ruyaga,
<hi rend='italic'>Andai</hi> Oscan, <hi rend='italic'>Nabha</hi>
Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Bentus</hi> Ausonian,
<hi rend='italic'>Bana</hi> Kawi, <hi rend='italic'>Hanem</hi>
Pelagic, <hi rend='italic'>Abklia</hi> Abask,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Eheca</hi>
Mexican, <hi rend='italic'>Acate</hi> Cora, <hi rend='italic'>Peco</hi>
Chetimacha, &amp;c.
</quote>

<p>
West. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Soraia</hi> R.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Warab</hi> Old Arabic,
<hi rend='italic'>Varapa</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Saraya</hi>
Sanscrit, <hi rend='italic'>Urop</hi> Pelagic,
<hi rend='italic'>Hesper</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Vesper</hi>
Latin, <hi rend='italic'>Urai</hi> Bugis.
<hi rend='italic'>Sor</hi> Aramic. See Setting Sun.
</p>

<p>
World. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Queya</hi>, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ocon</hi>
R. D.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>On</hi> Oriental
Root, <hi rend='italic'>Xton</hi> Greek, <hi rend='italic'>Queya</hi>
from <hi rend='italic'>Quiscaya</hi>
whole earth.
</p>

<p>
Which, <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hiqui</hi> Laet.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Qui</hi>
French, <hi rend='italic'>Ilquale</hi>
Italian, <hi rend='italic'>Cui</hi> Sicilian.
</p>

<p>
Worms. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Cusi</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Piojo</hi>
in Jamaica.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Cus</hi>
Lybian, <hi rend='italic'>Baco</hi> Toscan, <hi rend='italic'>Pioc</hi> (vermin)
Celtic.
</p>

<p>
Yes. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Ha</hi>.&mdash;Primitive.
<hi rend='italic'>Ha</hi> Lezghi, <hi rend='italic'>Ya</hi>
Gothic and Lamut, <hi rend='italic'>Do</hi> Ostiac, <hi rend='italic'>Aham</hi>
Arabic, <hi rend='italic'>Am</hi> Haikan, <hi rend='italic'>A</hi> Timani and Bulam
Africa, <hi rend='italic'>Uaa</hi> Jolof,
<hi rend='italic'>Yaga</hi> Congo, <hi rend='italic'>Ay</hi>
English, <hi rend='italic'>Hea</hi> African Atlantes,&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Haha</hi>
Apalachi, <hi rend='italic'>Aa</hi> Aleutian, <hi rend='italic'>Haa</hi> Otomaco,
Othomi and Cumanchi, <hi rend='italic'>Ya</hi> Totonac and
Puris, <hi rend='italic'>May</hi> Chili,
<hi rend='italic'>Oyah</hi> Ozage, <hi rend='italic'>Ahi</hi> Cado,
<hi rend='italic'>Yasay</hi> Aruac.
</p>

<p>
Yellow. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hobas</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Majob</hi>
Lezghi, <hi rend='italic'>Lobidus</hi>
Ausonian, <hi rend='italic'>Bahenda</hi> Biaju of Borneo,
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
<hi rend='italic'>Aubain</hi> (Oben) Old French, <hi rend='italic'>Hoang</hi> Chinese.
</p>

<p>
Yuca gloriosa. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Yuca</hi> E. same in Mexico,
meaning bright, white.
</p>

<p>
Fragments On The Western Dialects Of
Cuba, Jamaica, And The Lucayas Islands
</p>

<p>
C. Cuba, by Herrera, Diaz, Columbus,
Acosta, Laet, Munoz, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
J. Jamaica, by Columbus, Garcia, Gomara,
&amp;c.
</p>

<p>
L. Lucayas, by Columbus, Acosta, Oviedo,
&amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Land or Country, <hi rend='italic'>Katos</hi>, L. <hi rend='italic'>Xai</hi> J. <hi rend='italic'>Nacan</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Guaca</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Island, <hi rend='italic'>Caya</hi>, L <hi rend='italic'>Cayo</hi>, C <hi rend='italic'>Caic</hi> J.
</p>

<p>
Stranger, <hi rend='italic'>Guachinango</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
House, <hi rend='italic'>Bohio</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Remora, <hi rend='italic'>Reves</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Partridge, <hi rend='italic'>Lizas</hi>, C. by Ocampo.
</p>

<p>
Pheasant, <hi rend='italic'>Babiayas</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Parrot, <hi rend='italic'>Maxa</hi> C. <hi rend='italic'>Macan</hi>, J.
</p>

<p>
Prince, Lord, <hi rend='italic'>Guami</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Rabbits, <hi rend='italic'>Usias</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hutic</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Quinaxes</hi> C.
<hi rend='italic'>Hutia</hi> L.
</p>

<p>
Opuntia, <hi rend='italic'>Tuna</hi> C.
</p>

<p>
Cacao, <hi rend='italic'>Cacao</hi> C.
</p>

<p>
Priest, <hi rend='italic'>Behique</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bohique</hi> C. L.
</p>

<p>
River, <hi rend='italic'>Agua</hi> C.
</p>

<p>
Corn, <hi rend='italic'>Maysi</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Bread, <hi rend='italic'>Zabi</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
God, <hi rend='italic'>Yocahuna</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Guama-coti</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Guama-oxocoti</hi>,
C.
</p>

<p>
Supreme being, <hi rend='italic'>Attabex</hi>, C.
</p>

<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>

<p>
Ghost, <hi rend='italic'>Dupi</hi>, J.
</p>

<p>
Life, <hi rend='italic'>Bi</hi>, C. L.
</p>

<p>
Fountain, <hi rend='italic'>Mini</hi>, C. L.
</p>

<p>
Wood, <hi rend='italic'>Maica</hi>, J.
</p>

<p>
Cedar, <hi rend='italic'>Cauvana</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Dog, <hi rend='italic'>Alco</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Alligator, <hi rend='italic'>Cayaman</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Poke, <hi rend='italic'>Cucato</hi>, J.
</p>

<p>
Fire-fly, <hi rend='italic'>Locuyos</hi>, C. <hi rend='italic'>Zievas</hi>, L.
</p>

<p>
Noble, <hi rend='italic'>To</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mato</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Shell, <hi rend='italic'>Cohobas</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Guayac, Guacum, C.
</p>

<p>
Red, <hi rend='italic'>Ris</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
White Worm, <hi rend='italic'>Cusi</hi>, J.
</p>

<p>
Palm Worm, <hi rend='italic'>Piojo</hi>, J.
</p>

<p>
King. <hi rend='italic'>Caxicus</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Within, <hi rend='italic'>Hiqui</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nacan</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Gold, <hi rend='italic'>Nucay</hi>, C. L. Columbus.
</p>

<p>
Yams, <hi rend='italic'>Mames</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Grape Vine, <hi rend='italic'>Uveros</hi>, C.
</p>

<p>
Fragments On The Eyeri Eastern Dialects
Of Boriquen And The Carib Islands.
</p>

<p>
B. Boriquen, by Herrera, Acosta, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
E. Dialect of the Women of Carib, quite
different from Carib, by Rochefort, &amp;c.
</p>

<p>
Land, Island, <hi rend='italic'>Kati</hi>, E. <hi rend='italic'>Ca</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ay</hi>, B.
</p>

<p>
God, <hi rend='italic'>Iocana</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Guama-nomocon</hi>, B.
</p>

<p>
Noble, <hi rend='italic'>Ditayno</hi>, B.
</p>

<p>
Snake, <hi rend='italic'>Boba</hi>, B.
</p>

<p>
Cloudy, <hi rend='italic'>Furzidi</hi>, B.
</p>

<p>
Mahogany, <hi rend='italic'>Maga</hi>, B.
</p>

<p>
Poison Apple, <hi rend='italic'>Manzanila</hi>, B.
</p>

<p>
Cotton Tree, <hi rend='italic'>Zeyba,</hi> B.
</p>

<p>
Violet, <hi rend='italic'>Quibey</hi>, B.
</p>

<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>

<p>
Bananas, <hi rend='italic'>Camois</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Coco, <hi rend='italic'>Coquillas</hi>, B.
</p>

<p>
Guayac, <hi rend='italic'>Guage</hi>, B.
</p>

<p>
Hog, <hi rend='italic'>Saine</hi>, B.
</p>

<p>
Boat, <hi rend='italic'>Piraguas</hi>, B.
</p>

<p>
Wood, Tree, Bow, <hi rend='italic'>Chimala</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Angel, <hi rend='italic'>Chemin</hi>, Angels, <hi rend='italic'>Chemignum</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Spirits, <hi rend='italic'>Opoyem</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Moon, <hi rend='italic'>Mona</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kati</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Storm, <hi rend='italic'>Urogan</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Blood, <hi rend='italic'>Moinalu</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Heaven or above, <hi rend='italic'>Ubec</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Bread, <hi rend='italic'>Maru</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Boat, <hi rend='italic'>Canoa</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Pages</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Man, <hi rend='italic'>Eyeri</hi>, Men, <hi rend='italic'>Eyerium</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Woman, <hi rend='italic'>Inaru</hi>, Women, <hi rend='italic'>Inuyum</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Foe, <hi rend='italic'>Akani</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Little, <hi rend='italic'>Nianti</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
House, Hut, <hi rend='italic'>Tuhonoco</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Garden, <hi rend='italic'>Chali</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
War, <hi rend='italic'>Nihuctu</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Mother, <hi rend='italic'>Bibi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nucu-churon</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Father, <hi rend='italic'>Baba</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nucu-chili</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Grandfather, <hi rend='italic'>Narguti</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Wife, <hi rend='italic'>Liani</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Son, <hi rend='italic'>Rabu</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Daughter, <hi rend='italic'>Rahen</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
The, <hi rend='italic'>Ni</hi>, N'.
</p>

<p>
Heart, <hi rend='italic'> Nanichi</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Vassal, <hi rend='italic'>Labuyu</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Sea, <hi rend='italic'>Balana</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Bed, <hi rend='italic'>Nekera</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Sun, <hi rend='italic'>Kachi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cochi</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Money, <hi rend='italic'>Agucat</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>

<p>
Palm, <hi rend='italic'>Caico</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Red, <hi rend='italic'>Pu</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
People, <hi rend='italic'>Ibas</hi>, B. Cabres, E.
</p>

<p>
Priest, <hi rend='italic'>Boyez</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Wanderer, <hi rend='italic'>Umckua</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Devil, <hi rend='italic'>Mabuya</hi>, E.
</p>

<p>
Vocabulary Of The Cairi Of Trinidad
Island, 1594.
</p>

<p>
This Dialect of the <hi rend='smallcaps'>aruac</hi> is the nearest
geographically to the <hi rend='italic'>Eyeri</hi>, and yet very
different; nearer in words to the <hi rend='italic'>Aruac</hi> of
the Continent. Therefore the <hi rend='italic'>Aruac</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Taino</hi> altho' belonging to the same group,
are distinct Languages, and the two people
had been separated for ages.
</p>

<p>
Dudley collected in 1594, about 55 words
of it, which are in Purchas, yet have been
neglected by all the Philologists. Out of
these 27 are in my <hi rend='italic'>Taino</hi> List, and offer
16 affinities, equal to 56 per cent. The remainder
27, lack there and cannot be compared;
but afford a kind of supplement to it.
</p>

<p>
16 Comparable Words Akin In Both.
</p>

<p>
Man, <hi rend='italic'>Guttemock</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Woman, <hi rend='italic'>Hiaru</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Heaven, <hi rend='italic'>Huihua</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Gold, <hi rend='italic'>Calcoari</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Maize, <hi rend='italic'>Mauris</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Pipe, <hi rend='italic'>Bayu</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Shell, <hi rend='italic'>Tibetibe</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Water, <hi rend='italic'>Bara</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Oronuy</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Sun, <hi rend='italic'>Hadali</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Moon, <hi rend='italic'>Katti</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Bread, <hi rend='italic'>Callit</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>

<p>
Fire, <hi rend='italic'>Hicket</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Eyes, <hi rend='italic'>Cosi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Scrath</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Boat, <hi rend='italic'>Canoa</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Canosin</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Stone, <hi rend='italic'>Sibath</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Head, <hi rend='italic'>Cabbo</hi>.
</p>

<p>
12 Different Comparable Words.
</p>

<p>
Copper, <hi rend='italic'>Arara</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Metal, Iron, <hi rend='italic'>Mointiman</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Emerald, <hi rend='italic'>Taarao</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Sword, <hi rend='italic'>Caspara</hi>.
</p>

<p>
This, My, <hi rend='italic'>Da</hi>, D.
</p>

<p>
Parrot, <hi rend='italic'>Wahowa</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Tree, <hi rend='italic'>Mentini</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Potato, <hi rend='italic'>Halete</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Batatas, <hi rend='italic'>Caenuda</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Knife, <hi rend='italic'>Yedola</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Basket, <hi rend='italic'>Queca</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Tobacco, <hi rend='italic'>Hurreit</hi>.
</p>

<p>
27 Additional Words Not Comparable.
</p>

<p>
Hand, <hi rend='italic'>Can</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Feet, <hi rend='italic'>Cutti</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Knees, <hi rend='italic'>Cude</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Toes, <hi rend='italic'>Boda</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Hair, <hi rend='italic'>Bairo</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Barah</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Bow, <hi rend='italic'>Marahabo</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Arrow, <hi rend='italic'>Semaro</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Spoon, <hi rend='italic'>Heldaro</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Silver, <hi rend='italic'>Perota</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Forehead, <hi rend='italic'>Dessi</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Tongue, <hi rend='italic'>Dill</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Ears, <hi rend='italic'>Dudica</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Lips, <hi rend='italic'>Desire</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Teeth, <hi rend='italic'>Arehe</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Monkey, <hi rend='italic'>Howa</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>

<p>
Chest, <hi rend='italic'>Bodad</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Well, <hi rend='italic'>Sakel</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Bracelet, <hi rend='italic'>Techir</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Scissors, <hi rend='italic'>Arkeano</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Comb, <hi rend='italic'>Baruda</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Mouth, <hi rend='italic'>Lacoak</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Bell, <hi rend='italic'>Toletilero</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Stick, <hi rend='italic'>Adoth</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Beach, <hi rend='italic'>Barenaine</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Flying fish, <hi rend='italic'>Bohery</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Tunny fish, <hi rend='italic'>Uassa</hi>.
</p>

<p>
I don't know, <hi rend='italic'>Nonguo</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nonquapa</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Fragment On The Araguas Of Brazil, 1519.
</p>

<p>
As early as 1519, Pigafetta collected a
dozen words of the Brazilian Language;
which are quite different from the <hi rend='italic'>Tupi</hi>;
but very akin to the Haytian. Altho' he
does not name the tribe he visited, they
must have been <hi rend='italic'>Araguas</hi>, who are thus
traced to the <hi rend='italic'>Aruac</hi> Stock. This great nation
was still further extended; since the
Patagons or <hi rend='italic'>Tinguis</hi>, the Chiquitos or
<hi rend='italic'>Taos</hi>, and perhaps the <hi rend='italic'>Charruas</hi> belonged
to it, as I shall show elsewhere. Meantime
adding some words from Cabot &amp; Vespucci,
we have 17 Araguas words, whereof 14 are
comparable with the Haytian, offering 10
affinities, which gives 72 per cent of mutual
analogy, much more than with the <hi rend='italic'>Cairi</hi>.
</p>

<p>
10 Consimilar Words.
</p>

<p>
House, <hi rend='italic'>Boi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bohio</hi>, by Cabot.
</p>

<p>
Corn, <hi rend='italic'>Maiz</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Rattle, <hi rend='italic'>Hanmaraca</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Boat, <hi rend='italic'>Canoe</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>

<p>
Sword, <hi rend='italic'>Macana</hi>, Cabot.
King, <hi rend='italic'>Cachic</hi>, (written <hi rend='italic'>Cacich</hi>) Italian
Orthography.
</p>

<p>
Good, <hi rend='italic'>Tum</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Bed, <hi rend='italic'>Hamac</hi>.
Big-land, <hi rend='italic'>Taquino</hi>, by Vespuci, name of
Brazil.
</p>

<p>
4 Different Comparable Words.
</p>

<p>
Knife, <hi rend='italic'>Tarse</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Bananas, <hi rend='italic'>Pacaras</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Pear, <hi rend='italic'>Caxus</hi>, by Cabot.
</p>

<p>
Meal or Cassave, <hi rend='italic'>Hui</hi>.
</p>

<p>
3 Words Not Comparable.
</p>

<p>
Hook, <hi rend='italic'>Pinda</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Scissors, <hi rend='italic'>Pirame</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Comb, <hi rend='italic'>Chipag</hi>.
</p>

<p>
End Of First Volume.
</p>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
